Site: The Guardian
Title: ‘A new chapter begins’: Cristiano Ronaldo signs new two-year Al-Nassr deal
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/26/cristiano-ronaldo-signs-new-al-nassr-contract

Cristiano Ronaldo has signed a new two-year deal at Al-Nassr, extending his stay with the Saudi Pro League team to June 2027, when the forward will be 42.

“Al Nassr Club Company officially signed a contract extension with Cristiano Ronaldo,” the Riyadh-based club posted on X. “[The] Al Nassr captain’s contract will be valid until 2027.”

“A new chapter begins. Same passion, same dream. Let’s make history together,” Ronaldo posted on his Instagram account, alongside a picture of his contract signing. The former Real Madrid, Juventus and Manchester United star’s existing deal had been due to expire at the end of June.

It marks a dramatic turn of events after Ronaldo posted “the chapter is over” on social media following Al-Nassr’s final league game of the season last month. That fuelled speculation the five-time Ballon d’Or winner was to leave the club.

The Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, then claimed Ronaldo was in discussions over potentially joining a side that had qualified for the Club World Cup. The Portugal captain confirmed there had been “plenty of contact” with clubs , but that he had opted against pursuing a move any further.

Ronaldo joined Al-Nassr in December 2022 as a free agent after leaving United, following a controversial interview in which he criticised the Premier League club and then manager Erik ten Hag. He has scored 99 goals in 111 appearances for Al-Nassr and netted 35 last season to win the Saudi Pro League’s golden boot award for top scorer.

Ronaldo has scored 938 goals for club and country in his career, needing 62 more to reach the 1,000 mark.

Al-Nassr are without a manager after parting company with Stefano Pioli on Wednesday. The former Milan manager, who was appointed in September, led Al-Nassr to a third-placed finish last season, 13 points behind the champions, Al-Ittihad.