Site: The Guardian
Title: After 47 years in the US, Ice took this Iranian mother from her yard. Her family just wants her home
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jul/03/ice-iran-donna-kashanian

K aitlynn Milne says her mother is usually always up first thing in the morning, hours before the rest of the family. She enjoys being productive in the quiet hours around sunrise. It’s an especially optimal time to do yard work, when the rest of her New Orleans neighborhood still sleeps and she can count on peacefully completing chores.

Gardening and rearranging the shed is how an average morning would go for Madonna “Donna” Kashanian, a 64-year-old Iranian mother, wife, home cook, parent-teacher association (PTA) member and lifelong community service volunteer.

“She always says: ‘I’ve already done most of my day before y’all even wake up,’ complaining at us,” said Kaitlynn, 32. It was always done with love, she says, as her mother adores taking care of others and would wake up every morning excited to do just that.

But the morning of Sunday, 22 June, didn’t go like every other morning. In the early hours, while her husband, Russell Milne, slept inside the house, Kashanian was approached in her yard by plainclothes men who identified themselves as Ice agents.

She was quickly arrested without her family being told anything. They only found out after a neighbor who happened to be awake witnessed the arrest and notified them.

According to the neighbor, Kashanian was handcuffed before being taken away by multiple agents, details Kashanian herself was later able to confirm to her family. Her arrest involved three unmarked cars, including one that appeared to be a lookout, which her neighbor and family believe had been watching for a moment when Kashanian was outside and alone.

“Had the neighbors not walked out at the same time they were pushing her into the car, we would not have known she was taken,” said Russell.

Kashanian was able to call her family about an hour later, when she relayed to them what had happened and where she was. Ice officers told her that she was being taken to a holding center in Mississippi, before eventually being transferred back to a detention center in Louisiana. After that Sunday morning call, her husband and daughter didn’t hear from her again until Tuesday.

She remains in Ice custody in Basile, Louisiana, despite having no criminal record.

The timing of Kashanian’s detention was just hours after US airstrikes in Iran, a move that has ramped up the deportations of Iranians by the Trump administration. It also comes amid a nationwide crackdown by Ice, which has seen tens of thousands of immigrants detained, often by masked agents, plunged many communities into fear and outraged civil liberties advocates.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/c6caecd5199adb188aa37bb27fb68eae8f6d0cfd/0_0_656_563/master/656.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Donna Kashanian, at her wedding to Russell Milne.Photograph: Family of Donna Kashanian

Kashanian arrived in the US in 1978 on a student visa and has lived in the country ever since. She later applied for asylum, citing fears of persecution due to her father’s ties to the US-backed Shah of Iran.

Her asylum request was ultimately denied, but she was granted a stay of removal on the condition she comply with immigration requirements, a condition her family says she always met. Kashanian was so careful about regularly attending her meetings with immigration officials that she once checked in from South Carolina during Hurricane Katrina.

Despite having to juggle constant immigration checks, Kashanian remained a devotee to community service work. She volunteered with Habitat for Humanity, helping rebuild homes after Katrina. She worked with Nola Tree Project, a local non-profit that replants trees after disasters. She served on a PTA, volunteering at her daughter’s elementary school, middle school and high school.

“She was constantly around,” said Kaitlynn. “She was constantly helping with upkeep of the schools. She was always there, always helping the teachers and custodial staff, anything to be supportive. Everyone knew Kaitlynn’s mom.”

She also found the time to become a skilled home cook. Her YouTube channel , titled Mandonna in the Kitchen, is dedicated to sharing her favorite Persian recipes with aspiring cooks.

According to her daughter and husband, Kashanian is an optimist who’s almost impossible to upset. But there is one thing that never fails to unsettle her, and that’s improperly cooked rice.

Caption: Madonna ‘Donna’ Kashanian demonstrating how to properly cook Persian rice on her YouTube channel.

Now that she has been moved to a facility in Louisiana, her family has been able to set up a line of communication, speaking to her once a day. But she is given a limited amount of time to call or message, so communication is restricted. She says she has still not been assigned a case worker.

“She’s in pretty good spirits,” said Russell. “She’s more worried about us, and about the lack of communication she’s getting about her situation. They’re not really giving her any information, and that’s what’s scary.”

Russell and Kaitlynn have been working tirelessly to find legal help, but it has been challenging due partially to the complexity of Donna’s case, with some of her documents seeming to have been lost over decades of changing hands in the immigration offices.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/4c618ff07d95f19c3d82782e6e0399b510e53e38/0_0_741_989/master/741.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Donna Kashanian (right) with her husband, Russell, and daughter, Kaitlynn.Photograph: Family of Donna Kashanian

But the other big challenge is the limited availability of immigration lawyers. As the Trump administration has escalated the amount of Ice arrests, there is a shortage of legal counsel for immigrants and their families to go to for help.

“We have been on the phone nonstop from 8am to 10pm almost every day the last week trying to find help, and it’s proving difficult because all the immigration lawyers are all dealing with everyone else’s crises as well,” said Kaitlynn. “So far, we haven’t gotten a lot of optimistic responses.”

Like her mother, Kaitlynn remains in good spirits despite the constant obstacles, staying focused on helping someone else who currently needs it. But there is one moment in her show of resilience when her voice falters, as she recalls a memory from her childhood when her mother created a French book section in her New Orleans elementary school library.

“I had forgotten that until just now,” Kaitlynn said, through tears. “Because there were no French books in the library. She organized that and got it together and painted this little tiny nook.”

Russell says the focus currently is just to get his wife out of detention. “We’re working on a grassroots campaign and a letter-writing campaign on her behalf, that will hopefully be able to at least gain her release from the detention center,” he said.

“After that, we can move forward with next steps through the immigration offices,” he added. “But right now, just getting her home is the challenge.”