Site: The Guardian
Title: Arlene Phillips: ‘My biggest disappointment? Being let go from Strictly’
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2025/jun/28/arlene-phillips-choreographer-biggest-disappointment-let-go-from-strictly-interview

B orn in Lancashire, Arlene Phillips, 82, created the dance group Hot Gossip in the 1970s. She went on to become a world-renowned choreographer, and was a judge on Strictly Come Dancing from 2004-8. In 2021, she was made a dame for her services to dance and charity and in 2024 received an Olivier award for her work on Guys and Dolls. Her current shows include Starlight Express and A Midsummer Night’s Dream in London. She is an ambassador for the Alzheimer’s Society and is supporting its Forget Me Not appeal. She lives with her partner in London and has two daughters.

What is your most treasured possession? An old biscuit tin, which was my mum’s jewellery box – she passed away when I was a teenager.

Describe yourself in three words Loving, creative, demanding.

What has been your biggest disappointment? Being let go from Strictly.

Would you choose fame or anonymity? Fame, because I had a taste of it.

Who is your celebrity crush? It’s always been, since I first met him, David Tennant.

What is your guiltiest pleasure? Sneaking cheese from the fridge.

Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? A Biba dress when I really couldn’t afford it. It was every scrap of my money and I’ve never parted with it.

What is your most unappealing habit? Never sitting still at a meal: if anybody drops a crumb or spills a bit of sauce I go and get the kitchen roll and wipe it up.

What is the worst thing anyone has said to you? In school, I was 11, and we had to paint a picture of family life. My painting was held up to the class and I was told it looked like a spider with ink on its feet had walked across the page. It was done so viciously – humiliating.

What is the worst job you’ve done? In a Dagenham factory at 6am, picking soldiers’ greatcoats from wars around the world to sell at the market in Chelsea. I smelled like mothballs, and no one would come near me.

Which book are you ashamed not to have read? The Bible.

What is your greatest fear? Dying.

What does love feel like? Like you’ve got hot-water bottles all over you.

What has been your closest brush with the law? I was travelling late at night from Strictly to a country cottage. I thought someone was following me, and the faster I drove, the more this follower was shining lights on me. Then I realised it was a police car! They laughed. It didn’t occur to me that I had been speeding in the first place.

What do you consider your greatest achievement? My daughters and granddaughters.

What keeps you awake at night? One after the other, thoughts come banging in – and it’s no sleep for you tonight, dearie.

What would your superpower be? Good health for all.

Which words or phrases do you most overuse? I’m just coming.

When did you last cry, and why? I play Classic FM in the car – emotional music brings me to tears thinking about people I’ve loved and lost.

What is the most important lesson life has taught you? Life is never fair.

How would you like to be remembered? Kind, thoughtful and gave damn good advice.