Site: The Guardian
Title: Arsenal could face battle with Spurs to sign £67.5m Eberechi Eze
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/30/arsenal-could-face-battle-with-spurs-to-sign-675m-eberechi-eze

Arsenal have held talks with representatives of Eberechi Eze and could battle with Tottenham for the Crystal Palace forward. Mikel Arteta has identified Eze as someone who could add creativity and depth to his squad after they finished as Premier League runners-up for a third successive season.

Arsenal officials met Eze’s agents on Saturday to discuss personal terms and other details, but have yet to open talks with Palace over the England international.

Eze, who was released by Arsenal at the age of 13, is believed to have a release clause of £67.5m in a contract that runs until 2027, and Palace have been adamant they will allow him to depart only if that is met. Tottenham have a longstanding interest in Eze and have discussed whether to make him a statement signing for their new manager, Thomas Frank. A readiness to submit an official offer could depend on whether Palace are willing to accept less than his clause, which at this stage seems unlikely.

With Marc Guéhi prepared to see out the final 12 months of his deal if the right move does not materialise, Palace are wary of losing Eze for a discounted fee if he does not leave this summer. In January, they rejected a bid from Spurs worth up to £70m for Guéhi, who is also of interest to Liverpool and Newcastle. Liverpool have been reported to be willing to offer Ben Doak as part of the deal after Palace expressed interest in signing the Scotland forward in January.

Eze, who scored the winning goal i n the FA Cup final in May to secure Palace’s first major trophy, celebrated his 27th birthday on Sunday and his age means clubs have been reluctant to meet his release clause. He has been in impressive form for club and country since scoring his first England goal against Latvia in March and is willing to join either north London club if a deal can be agreed.