Site: The Guardian
Title: Arsenal complete £9m Christian Nørgaard signing and step up Eze chase
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/10/arsenal-complete-9m-christian-norgaard-signing-and-step-up-eberechi-eze-chase

Arsenal have confirmed the signing of Christian Nørgaard from Brentford and are expected to step up their attempts to sign Eberechi Eze from Crystal Palace .

The Denmark international is understood to have signed a two-year contract at the Emirates with the option of extending it by another year after Arsenal agreed to pay a fee of around £9m up front. With add ons that could rise to £12m. Nørgaard, who had been at Brentford since 2019 and played more than 120 games in the Premier League, had two years left on the contract extension he signed in March.

The 31-year-old has been identified as a player who could add experience to Mikel Arteta’s squad after the departures of Jorginho and Thomas Partey. The signing of Spain midfielder Martin Zubimendi was also confirmed this week.

Sporting director, Andrea Berta, said: “We’re very pleased to welcome Christian to the club. He has been a consistent high performer in the Premier League and brings many qualities to our club. He is a leader, and a player with high tactical intelligence and versatility who will have a very positive impact to the squad. We welcome Christian to Arsenal .” Arteta added: “He is a strong midfielder with excellent tactical awareness and versatility. He also has physical presence and intelligence which will give us added depth and balance. Christian will bring a lot to the group both on and off the pitch, and we’re excited to start working with him in this next chapter of his career.”

Arsenal remain in negotiations with Sporting and Chelsea over moves for Viktor Gyokeres and Noni Madueke respectively and have also held talks with representatives of Eze, who scored the winning goal for Crystal Palace in the FA Cup final.

The England forward has a £67.5m release clause and it is understood that Arsenal are planning to make contact with Palace’s chairman Steve Parish to discuss a potential move, although he is unlikely to consider any offers below their asking price. Eze, who was released by Arsenal at the age of 13, has two years left on his contract at Selhurst Park.

Arsenal are also believed to be confident that Ethan Nwaneri will sign a new contract at the Emirates despite interest from Chelsea and German clubs in the 18-year-old. The Hale End academy graduate’s current deal expires next summer.