Site: The Guardian
Title: Bellingham and Vinícius shine as Real Madrid top group at Club World Cup
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/27/real-madrid-red-bull-salzburg-club-world-cup-group-h-result-match-report

If Real Madrid are to make a success of the Xabi Alonso era they will have to embrace their former midfielder’s quest for structure. In turn, though, Alonso will come away from his new side’s encouraging 3-0 win over Red Bull Salzburg in Philadelphia knowing that keeping everyone onside will be easier if he continues to find ways to let Jude Bellingham and Vinícius Júnior have their share of the limelight.

There are times when it seems that the Club World Cup would function just as well if it was simply Madrid touring the US, emerging for stadium appearances and playing no actual football. A lot of people just want to see the stars. There were shrieks when Bellingham strolled out a little over an hour before this game kicked off and gave a partisan crowd a regal wave. It was a reminder that Carlo Ancelotti remained part of the show so long merely by remembering that his main function was to let others take centre stage.

But perhaps Madrid can have the best of both worlds. If there is a tension over whether they are ready for Alonso’s systems-based approach, it is also true that more order was needed last season. That is part of the challenge for Alonso. He mixed things up against Salzburg, using a 3-5-2 formation, and watched Madrid produce their most cohesive performance under him to date, ensuring that they emerged as winners of Group H and avoided a date with Manchester City in the last 16.

Juventus are up next and will be worried after seeing Madrid’s level rise against Salzburg, who crashed out by virtue of Al-Hilal’s win over Pachuca. Alonso will be pleased with how the system worked but he will also note the part played by Bellingham and Vinícius, who grabbed a goal and a gorgeous assist. Bellingham, playing in a more withdrawn role, was excellent and still found opportunities to roam. He made the opener for Vinícius and played with a mixture of discipline and imagination. All Alonso has to do now is work out how to get Kylian Mbappé in the team.

Alonso has spoken about selflessness, about everything being easier if everyone runs a bit more. Kylian, are you taking notes? How Mbappé fits into this way of playing remains to be seen. The France striker is yet to feature in the US, a bad stomach sidelining him. Gonzalo García, a youth product, continued up front and scored his second goal in three games.

There was still enough star power to ensure a 65,000 turned up at Lincoln Financial Field. A handful of people even wore Salzburg shirts. The Austrians are coming off a troubled campaign, the Pep Lijnders experiment not working out, domestic dominance relinquished, but they had hope of progressing after four points from their first two games.

There was a shift in Madrid’s tactics, Aurelien Tchouameni joining Dean Huijsen and Antonio Rudiger in a back three, Fran García and Trent Alexander-Arnold operating as wing-backs. It was an interesting experiment for Alexander-Arnold, who had always had Mo Salah to combine with at Liverpool. He never had the run of the right flank to himself.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/78512ec027de6fe46884fd0836db7ab6338bd807/0_0_4806_3204/master/4806.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Trent Alexander-Arnold saw a lot of the ball early on.Photograph: Antonio Villalba/Real Madrid/Getty Images

Alonso is seeing what works. Arda Guler and Fede Valverde lined up in midfield with Bellingham, who played to the right. Vinícius was very high. Madrid started well. Alexander-Arnold saw a lot of the ball and created the first chance, crossing with his left foot, but Rudiger headed over.

Madrid’s pressing was intense. A brilliant piece of play should have led to the opener after 20 minutes, Bellingham slipping Vinícius in, Christian Zawieschitzky saving well. The passing was sharp. But there were a few nervy moments too, Tchouameni having to react to stop Edmund Baidoo shooting from eight yards out.

Salzburg gained a foothold, threatening on the counterattack. But Madrid had mostly played with balance and control during the first half. It was just a question of finding the connections in the final third.

The problem was solved when Bellingham dropped back and guided a lovely pass through the Salzburg midfield. Drifting in from the left, Vinícius collected possession and surged. Two defenders blocked his path but the Brazilian fooled them both, chopping on to his left foot before making it 1-0 with a low shot from 20 yards.

It was 2-0 soon after, a ricochet releasing Vinícius, who darted through before again confounding his markers, this time with a backheel for Valverde to score emphatically from 12 yards.

Salzburg responded with two half-time substitutions. Adam Daghim came on up front and soon tested Thibaut Courtois with a rasping drive. Daghim then wasted another chance after a mistake from Bellingham.

Madrid were unconvincing at the start of the second half, escaping again when Maurits Kjaergaard sidefooted over from a cutback, then when Bellingham cleared a shot off the line. At the same time Vinícius remained a box of tricks. Guler also delivered a perceptive, smart performance in midfield. Alexander-Arnold grew into his role.

Salzburg kept pressing. Alonso looked to settle things down by introducing Luka Modric. Rodrygo, who continues to be linked with Arsenal, came on. Doubts over whether the winger still fits in persist.

Alonso is looking at everyone. Bellingham eventually came off after a dynamic performance. Gonzalo García kept plugging away and had his goal when he bustled through before chipping Zawieschitzky. Madrid are improving after a slow start. They tend to become more dangerous as tournaments progress.