Site: The Guardian
Title: Benjamin Netanyahu corruption trial delayed on diplomatic and security grounds
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/30/benjamin-netanyahu-corruption-trial-delayed-ntwnfb

An Israeli court has cancelled this week’s hearings in Benjamin Netanyahu’s long-running corruption trial, accepting a request made by the prime minister on classified diplomatic and security grounds.

“Following the explanations given … we partially accept the request and cancel at this stage Mr Netanyahu’s hearings scheduled” for this week, the Jerusalem district court said in its ruling, published online by Netanyahu’s Likud party.

The ruling said that new reasons provided by Netanyahu, the head of Israel’s spy agency the Mossad and the military intelligence chief justified cancelling the hearings.

It comes after Donald Trump last week called for the case to be thrown out . In remarks on social media, the US president suggested the trial could interfere with Netanyahu’s ability to join negotiations with the Palestinian militant group Hamas and Iran, adding that the US was “not going to stand” for the continued prosecution, prompting Netanyahu to thank him in a message on X.

In a social media post, Trump described the case against the Israeli premier as a “witch hunt”, saying the trial “should be CANCELLED, IMMEDIATELY, or a Pardon given to a Great Hero”.

Netanyahu was indicted in 2019 on charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust – all of which he denies. He has cast the trial against him as an orchestrated leftwing witch-hunt meant to topple a democratically elected rightwing leader.

In one of the cases, he and his wife, Sara, are accused of accepting more than $260,000 worth of luxury goods such as cigars, jewellery and champagne from billionaires in exchange for political favours.

In two others, Netanyahu is accused of attempting to negotiate more favourable coverage from two Israeli media outlets. The prime minister has requested multiple postponements to the trial since it began in May 2020.

Netanyahu’s lawyers had asked the court to excuse him from testifying over the next two weeks so he could focus on security issues after a ceasefire with Iran and amid ongoing fighting in Gaza where Israeli hostages are held.

They submitted the prime minister’s schedule to the court to demonstrate “the national need for the prime minister to devote all his time and energy to the political, national and security issues at hand”.

The court initially rejected the lawyers’ request, but said in its ruling on Sunday that it had changed its judgment after hearing arguments from the prime minister and other senior officials.

A spokesperson for the Israeli prosecution declined to comment on Trump’s post.

Israeli opposition leader Yair Lapid said last week that Trump “should not interfere in a judicial trial in an independent country”.

Trump said Netanyahu was “right now” negotiating a deal with Hamas, though neither leader provided details, and officials from both sides have voiced scepticism over prospects for a ceasefire soon.

On Friday, the Republican president told reporters he believed a ceasefire was close.

With Reuters and Agence France-Presse