Site: The Guardian
Title: Chelsea agree seven-year deal to sign João Pedro from Brighton
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/29/chelsea-agree-seven-year-deal-to-sign-joao-pedro-from-brighton

Chelsea have reached an agreement to sign João Pedro from Brighton. The Brazil forward was a target for Newcastle but was only interested in a move to Stamford Bridge.

Negotiations ramped up over the weekend and have concluded with Chelsea agreeing to pay a fee in excess of £50m for João Pedro. Brighton have been holding out for £60m for the 23-year-old, who signed from ­Watford two years ago.

Chelsea have been looking for a versatile attacker and João Pedro, who will sign a seven-year deal, is ­flying in from Brazil for a medical on Monday in the US. He will be able to join their squad for their Club World Cup quarter-final against Palmeiras on Friday night.

The west London club have also agreed to sign the Borussia Dortmund winger Jamie Gittens for a fee in the region of £55m. Gittens is not eligible to play for Chelsea at the Club World Cup as he has already featured for Dortmund in the US.

João Pedro missed Brighton’s final two matches of the season after a training ground altercation with his teammate Jan Paul van Hecke. Yet Chelsea are convinced of the former Watford forward’s talent. Sam Jewell brought João Pedro to Brighton and has since joined Chelsea’s recruitment team. The club have lured a number of players and staff away from Brighton in the past three years.

The arrival of João Pedro will give Enzo Maresca more options in the final third. The head coach has been looking for a player capable of playing in a range of attacking positions, with Chelsea also considering a move for Mohammed Kudus. West Ham expect to receive bids from Kudus from elsewhere.

João Pedro is seen as a better fit than Christopher Nkunku and João Félix for Maresca’s system. Félix is wanted by Benfica and is not part of the Club World Cup squad.

Nkunku is in the US and scored Chelsea’s second against Benfica on Saturday but the France international has been out of favour and will be allowed to leave for the right price. Chelsea are also open to suitable offers for the England winger Noni Madueke.