Site: The Guardian
Title: Chelsea seal João Pedro signing on seven-year contract after £60m deal with Brighton
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/02/chelsea-sign-joao-pedro-seven-year-contract-60m-brighton

Chelsea have added João Pedro to their Club World Cup squad after signing the forward from Brighton in a deal worth up to £60m.

Enzo Maresca has been looking to add a versatile player to his attack and will have more options after the 23-year-old’s arrival. João Pedro, who has signed a seven-year deal, can play up front, as a second striker and on the left. The Brazil international scored 30 goals in 70 appearances for Brighton.

“Everyone knows this is a big club with a great history,” he said. “They had brilliant players in the past and have brilliant players now, so I am excited to join and you know when you are a Chelsea player you must think one thing – win”. Posting a message to Brighton fans on Instagram, João Pedro added: “I want to thank you all for the past two years we’ve been together, for all the support and great memories that we created, it was a pleasure and a privilege to work with this team.”

Fabian Hürzeler feels the transfer “is a good move for all parties” as the Brighton manager looks to reshape the squad for next season. “It is an excellent deal for the club, and a good return on a significant investment in an area of the pitch where we have a lot of competition and are already well served in terms of our attacking talent,” he said. “It is also an exciting move for João, it gives him the opportunity to play Champions League football this coming season and he will of course be keen to cement his position in the Brazil team ahead of the World Cup next summer.”

Newcastle were interested in João Pedro but were unable to convince him to join. The former Watford player favoured a move to Chelsea after they intensified efforts to sign him last weekend. Negotiations with Brighton moved swiftly and João Pedro could be involved in Chelsea’s Club World Cup quarter-final against Palmeiras on Saturday after flying to the US to complete a medical and sign his contract.

Chelsea have signed Liam Delap to provide competition for Nicolas Jackson up front and are closing in on a deal to sign the Borussia Dortmund winger Jamie Gittens. They could sign one more forward, with Manchester United’s Alejandro Garnacho, Lyon’s Malick Fofana, West Ham’s Mohammed Kudus and Eintracht Frankfurt’s Hugo Ekitike of interest. However, further incomings are expected to depend on sales, with Chelsea open to offers for Christopher Nkunku, João Felix and Noni Madueke.