Site: The Guardian
Title: Cuomo to stay in New York mayoral race despite Mamdani besting him in primary – report
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/27/cuomo-new-york-mayor-race-mamdani

Former New York governor Andrew Cuomo reportedly plans to run as an independent candidate in the New York City ’s mayoral race, days after finding himself bested in the Democratic primary by progressive insurgent candidate Zohran Mamdani .

Several news outlets reported late on Thursday that Cuomo, 67, part of a long and powerful political dynasty in New York, would not withdraw after conceding the primary to democratic socialist newcomer Mamdani, who is now the favorite in the race and could become the city’s first Muslim mayor at the general election in November.

Cuomo is now expected to continue as an independent candidate on a “Fight and Deliver” ballot line. But Cuomo has not decided whether to actively campaign in the coming months.

The former governor, who stepped down in 2021 in the face of allegations of sexual harassment and bullying in the workplace, now joins the embattled incumbent mayor, Eric Adams, a Democrat who has relaunched his campaign as an independent.

New York City was rocked politically on Tuesday night when Cuomo, who had at one point in the primary led Mamdani by 20 points, fell behind his rival by seven when a well-orchestrated campaign by the progressive candidate brought in passionate, younger voters not normally geared to mayoral primaries.

Seeking to soothe the concerns of the business community over a platform that includes tax hikes on the wealthy, rent freezes and free city services, Mamdani, 33, told ABC News this week that “there is a need for a new generation of leadership”.

“I think that the Democratic party must always remember what made so many proud to be Democrats , which is a focus on the struggles of working-class Americans across this country,” Mamdani told the outlet.

Prominent Wall Streeters are wary.

“It’s officially hot commie summer,” hedge fund billionaire Dan Loeb said on X after Mamdani’s win.

While news reports suggest that Cuomo is running, he has until the end of Friday to withdraw from his independent ballot line, according to the New York state board of elections calendar .

Mamdani ​ told CNN on Thursday he was “not at all” worried about Cuomo launching an independent bid, saying the pair had already faced off once and it turned out “pretty well”.

Meanwhile, Tennessee Republican congressman Andy Ogles suggested that Mamdani should be deported and denaturalized as a US citizen. Mamdani was born in Uganda.

“Zohran ‘little muhammad’ Mamdani is an antisemitic, socialist, communist who will destroy the great City of New York,” Ogles ​wrote in an X post. “He needs to be DEPORTED. Which is why I am calling for him to be subject to denaturalization proceedings.”

Ogles attached to his post a letter to the US attorney general, Pam Bondi, citing an entry in the US Code that outlines the revocation of citizenship for individuals who willfully misrepresent or conceal material support for terrorism.

Ogles cited a New York Post article that claimed Mamdani had expressed open solidarity with individuals convicted of terrorism-related offenses prior to becoming a US citizen.