Site: The Guardian
Title: Dortmund complete Club World Cup last eight line-up with win over Monterrey
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/02/dortmund-complete-club-world-cup-last-eight-line-up-with-win-over-monterrey

Serhou Guirassy scored two early goals and Borussia Dortmund held on to defeat CF Monterrey 2-1 on Tuesday night in Atlanta to reach the Fifa Club World Cup quarter-finals.

Karim Adeyemi assisted both to bring Guirassy’s tournament total to three.

German Berterame scored his third of the competition early in a much-improved second half for Monterrey that gave their German opponents some nervy moments. That included Sergio Ramos’ header early in second-half stoppage time that missed narrowly wide of the top left corner.

Dortmund prevailed to become the fifth and final European side to reach the last eight, the second from Germany along with Bayern Munich. Borussia Dortmund will face Real Madrid on Saturday in East Rutherford, N.J.

Monterrey was the last of five Concacaf entrants eliminated after Inter Miami’s 4-0 loss to Paris Saint-Germain in another round-of-16 clash on Sunday.

Berterame cut Monterrey’s deficit to 2-1 with a powerful downward header inside the right post after an initial cross from the left took a fortunate deflection off teammate Erick Aguirre.

Eleven minutes later, Monterrey’s Jesus Corona was played into a one-on-one by Sergio Canales’s throughball, but he fired his potential game-tying effort straight at Dortmund goalkeeper Gregor Kobel with a defender closing.

Guirassy and Adeyemi combined twice in the opening 24 minutes. In the 14th, Guirassy took a pass at the edge of the 18-yard box from Ramy Bensebaini with his back to goal and quickly slotted the ball to Adeyemi next to him. Adeyemi’s instant return pass played Guirassy into position for a low finish inside the left post and beyond the outstretched leg of charging goalkeeper Esteban Andrada.

Ten minutes later, Adeyemi chased a long ball down the right side, held up play and delivered a square pass into the run of Guirassy, who drove a 17-yard effort on the run that left Andrada little chance.

Guirassy could have had a hat-trick before half-time. In the 31st minute, he fired narrowly wide of the right post after Jobe Bellingham’s feed. In the 34th, Andrada’s remarkable recovery and save denied him after a cross from Pascal Gross.