Site: The Guardian
Title: England 4-0 Netherlands: Women’s Euro 2025 Group D ratings
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/09/england-netherlands-womens-euro-2025-group-d-ratings

England

Hannah Hampton Distribution was excellent, particularly her superb pass that led to England’s opening goal. 7

Lucy Bronze Much improved from Saturday and showed all her experience with her positioning. 7

Leah Williamson Orchestrated the team solidly from the back and blocked crosses well when called upon. 7

Jess Carter Looked significantly more comfortable at centre-back. Tackled strongly and read the game very well. 8

Alex Greenwood Supremely calm on the ball and composed one-on-one. England have found their best back four lineup. 7

Ella Toone Always offered teammates an option, worked hard and took her goal nicely. Good display. 7

Keira Walsh Took control of midfield and looked like the player we saw at Euro 2022. 7

Georgia Stanway Her emphatic strike was richly deserved. She was terrier-like, never giving the Dutch a moment’s rest. 8

Lauren James She terrified the Netherlands. Took her first goal magnificently. The star of the show. 8

Alessia Russo Her work rate and movement deserved a goal. Unfortunate to have one ruled out again. 7

Lauren Hemp Had the beating of Casparij all night. Confident, skilful and could have had three assists. 7

Substitutes Chloe Kelly (James, 69) England were in cruise control by the time she was brought on, but she did her job well. 6; Beth Mead (Hemp, 76) 6; Grace Clinton (Toone, 76) 6; Aggie Beever-Jones (Russo, 84) 6; Niamh Charles (Bronze, 84) 6.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/b1d2d3e3b1d783c893b5829ded2e20d8f168e8df/383_417_4549_2858/master/4549.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Deflated Netherlands players reflect on their heavy defeat by England.Photograph: Matthew Childs/Reuters

Netherlands

Daphne van Domselaar Not good, but she did make a couple of decent saves to prevent England from running riot. 5

Kerstin Casparij Struggled against her Manchester City teammate Hemp throughout and had a fairly bad evening. 5

Dominique Janssen Russo gave her the runaround. She may have nightmares about the England striker. 4

Veerle Buurman Looked outclassed by the skill in England’s forward line. One of three players taken off at half-time. 4

Esmee Brugts Could not cope with the flair of James. Hard to remember her winning a duel. 5

Wieke Kaptein Outbattled by Stanway, outrun by Toone and out-thought by Walsh. 5

Jackie Groenen Another Netherlands midfielder who simply could not get into the game. Failed to create enough. 5

Victoria Pelova Looked in excellent form against Wales but could not reproduce it. Never worried England. 5

Chasity Grant Dangerous with her pace early on and did at least try to get in behind. 6

Vivianne Miedema Outplayed by Carter and failed to make an impact before being substituted. 5

Jill Roord Curled over from a half chance but was otherwise relatively quiet as England dominated. 5

Substitutes Caitlin Dijkstra (Brugts, ht) Made a slight difference but was still no match for this confident England. 6; Lineth Beerensteyn (Roord, h-t) Momentarily looked as if she could be the gamechanger but England coped well. 6; Sherida Spitse (Buurman, h-t) One of the Netherlands’ all-time greats, but she is not the player she used to be. 5; Daniëlle van de Donk (Miedema, 66) 6; Damaris Egurrola (Groenen, 85) 6