Site: The Guardian
Title: Enzo Maresca intent on resisting interest in Chelsea defender Josh Acheampong
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/28/chelsea-enzo-maresca-josh-acheampong-club-world-cup

Enzo Maresca has said that Chelsea have no intention of selling Josh Acheampong this summer. Several clubs in England and Europe are tracking the 19-year-old defender but it is understood that there is no plan for him to leave Stamford Bridge at the moment.

Sources close to Acheampong have privately said that suggestions that the youngster is frustrated at Chelsea are incorrect. Acheampong, who started at right-back in Chelsea’s win over Esperance in the Club World Cup last Tuesday, signed a new five-year contract last year and enjoyed a breakthrough campaign under Maresca last season.

The academy product will only go on loan if he agrees with the club that it is best for his development but the long-term plan remains for him to thrive at Chelsea.

“The clubs that you mentioned, they like Josh, but we also like Josh,” Maresca said. “Any club likes good players. My plan with Josh is quite clear. I said many times that I really like Josh.

“I think he potentially can be a top defender for this club. It’s on him to have the right timing to do the things. We are full of young players here, full of talented players, even defenders. So I think the best plan for Josh is to be with us and I’m very happy if he’s going to be with us.”

Chelsea face Benfica in the last 16 in Charlotte on Saturday afternoon. It will be the first time that Enzo Fernandez faces Benfica since leaving them for £106.7m two years ago. Fernandez has the most goal involvements (14) of any Chelsea player in 2025.

“I am very pleased with Enzo,” Maresca said. “Firstly because he’s a nice boy, he’s polite. And then because with us, since we started, he’s working very well in all the aspects, inside the pitch, outside the pitch.

“We said already many times that with us this season’s struggle will be at the beginning to understand the way we want to play. But then he’s doing fantastic in terms of numbers, goals, assist.

“This is what we want from our attacking players. I said many times that I prefer to have the attacking players score 10 to 12 goals each than just a striker with 40 goals. His contribution this season has been top, and for sure next season will be even better.”