Site: The Guardian
Title: Fears grow for 26-year-old German backpacker missing in rural Western Australia
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2025/jul/09/carolina-wilga-german-backpacker-missing-in-rural-western-australia

Fears are mounting for the safety of a German backpacker who has been missing for more than a week in rural Western Australia .

Friends last heard from Carolina Wilga on Sunday 29 June while she was known to be in the Beacon area in the north-east of WA’s Wheatbelt region.

Authorities believed Wilga was at a convenience store the day before in Toodyay, about 90km north-east of Perth, and could be travelling in a black and silver 1995 Mitsubishi van with WA registration 1HDS 330.

The 26-year-old’s mother begged for anyone with information to contact authorities.

- Sign up for Guardian Australia’s breaking news email

Commenting on a WA police force Facebook post about the missing woman, Katja Will pleaded: “I’m her mother and need her help, as I can’t do much from Germany.”

“Carolina is still sorely missed. If anyone has any information, please contact the police. Please keep your eyes open!!!”

Wilga has not been seen or heard from since her last contact with friends in Beacon.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/c105ae95690671b6c569520eac79ffccf4b8513c/0_0_505_288/master/505.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Authorities believe Carolina Wilga could be travelling in a black and silver 1995 Mitsubishi van with WA registration 1HDS 330.Photograph: Western Australia police force

WA police sent significant land and air resources to the region, which is located more than three hours north-east of Perth.

The commissioner, Col Blanch, told ABC Perth radio that police were searching bushland around the Beacon town site.

“Her mobile phone is not currently on [and] we are very concerned,” he said on Wednesday.

The vehicle of another missing person, Barry Podmore, was found in a nearby part of the Wheatbelt in May after being reported missing by his family in December.

The 73-year-old Beacon resident was last seen on 4 December last year when he left his address to go prospecting in Karroun Hill. His vehicle may have been sighted travelling north-east of Beacon towards the Karroun Hill nature reserve on Friday 6 December, WA police said.

The vehicle was later found in the area, about 40km from the Beacon townsite.

A WA police spokesperson said on Wednesday night that police “have no information that suggest these incidents are related”.

Wilga had been backpacking in Australia for two years, staying mainly in hostels, WA police said.

She is described as having a slim build, with frizzy or curly long dark blond hair and brown eyes, and several tattoos, including one depicting symbols on her left arm.

Authorities urged anyone with information or dashcam, drone, CCTV or mobile phone footage in the Beacon area and surrounding Wheatbelt area between 29 June and 4 July to come forward.