Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Ferran Torres to swap Barcelona for Aston Villa?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/09/football-transfer-rumours-ferran-torres-to-swap-barcelona-for-aston-villa

F resh from selling their women’s team to their wholly separate, er, parent company , Aston Villa feel in the mood for waving their wedge about, with Ferran Torres their target. The Spanish site Fichajes says that Barcelona, no strangers themselves to imaginative accountancy flexes, have been sounded out for a £43m move for the forward.

Eberechi Eze to Arsenal seems to have acquired some momentum since the Mill first mulled it over on Tuesday, and the Sun is now touting the Gunners as clear favourites to gazump their rivals Tottenham to the Crystal Palace attacking midfielder’s signature. Palace are holding out for £68m but Arsenal’s sporting director, Andrea Berta, has apparently held talks with Eze’s people as interest is stepped up.

Liverpool have been busy buying forwards this summer but one big name heading out the door might be Luis Díaz . Goal.com reports that the Colombian is weighing up his options and being notably noncommittal amid interest from Bayern Munich, Barcelona and the Saudi Pro League, though he has also insisted he remains happy on Merseyside. Darwin Núñez is a likelier departure, with Napoli lodging a £42m bid for the Uruguay frontman.

If Bayern don’t land Díaz, they might have a better chance of snapping up Chelsea’s Christopher Nkunku . The Bundesliga champions have sounded out a loan move for the 27-year-old French forward in the past but Chelsea want a straight sale and Bayern remain interested.

Wednesday’s Jadon Sancho news has the winger being prepared to take a pay cut to facilitate a move from Manchester United to Juventus. United are still holding out for a £25m transfer fee but the wage bill on top of that would be substantial. Il Corriere dello Sport reports that Sancho is ready to accept a £7m-a-year deal but Juve want no more than €6m (£5.2m) plus add-ons.

Everton, eager to boost a threadbare squad , have been linked with the highly regarded Middlesbrough midfielder Hayden Hackney , though they may face competition domestically from Brentford, Fulham, Crystal Palace and West Ham, not to mention abroad from Porto and Stuttgart.

Sunderland are closing in on a deal for Club Brugge’s Chemsdine Talbi , reports transfer news guru Fabrizio Romano. The winger is poised to complete a €23m (£19.8m) move to Régis Le Bris’ newly promoted side. Their fellow promotees Burnley could be losing Maxime Estève to Tottenham. According to L’Equipe, Spurs have “resumed discussions” with Burnley over a move for the 23-year-old French centre-back, who was an ever-present in Scott Parker’s side last term.

And Saudi Arabia’s Al-Qadsiah have made a £45.7m offer for Mateo Retegui but Atalanta are having none of it apparently, and want around £6m more for their valued Italy striker.