Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Dominic Calvert-Lewin to Manchester United?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/07/football-transfer-rumours-dominic-calvert-lewin-to-manchester-united

T he Arsenal striker mystery may have reached its denouement: who will be unmasked as the man to knock down the ball to an onrushing Declan Rice. The answer appears to be Viktor Gyökeres , who is close to sealing his dream move from Sporting. If Benjamin Sesko is the great, lost Gunner, it’s because RB Leipzig want to charge €100m (around £86m), when Gyökeres will cost £70m and lower wages. Victor Osimhen , another striker in the reckoning, seems likely to convert his loan at Galatasaray to a permanent move, should a £65m fee be paid to Napoli. Yet another candidate, Real Madrid’s rather good Rodrygo , seems poised for a move to Al-Nassr in Saudi Arabia.

Chances are that Noni Madueke will be one of Gyokeres’s suppliers as the Arsenal-Chelsea trade route opens up once more. The winger wants Arsenal but Chelsea are open to accepting other bids than the Gunners’ £50m. Also, isn’t he a right winger, where Bukayo Saka plays? Seems Arteta wants a surfeit of players in each position, following the addition of Martín Zubimendi to a packed midfield. Chelsea need to sell £60m of talent to make Champions League regulations after the slapped wrist – and fine – received from Uefa on Friday .

More London-based news: West Ham are willing to sell Mohammed Kudus to Spurs, just not for the £50m they have been offered. That figure seems standard these days, and although Kudus has a release clause of £85m, the Hammers will have to accept less. West Ham need to sell to buy to overhaul a squad that struggled last season.

Some weekend rumours to mop up. Manchester United’s treatment room is to be blessed by the free transfer signing of Dominic Calvert-Lewin , who announced his departure from Everton last month. Another possible United signing is Chelsea’s Christopher Nkunku , another player with a mixed fitness record. Chelsea will accept a fee of £35m. United are also linked with another Everton alumni: Moise Kean , these days at Fiorentina, and still just 25 years of age.

How will such deals be paid for? Marcus Rashford ’s dream move to Barcelona is a possibility but then again, after failing to land Nico Williams, Luis Díaz of Liverpool is Barcelona’s leading target. That’s if the Catalan club can get players registered. United still want Brentford’s Bryan Mbeumo . Expect an improved bid soon.

Move off? West Brom winger Mikey ‘Jinky ’ Johnston ’s move to Flamengo has stalled as fans at the Brazilian club have complained they don’t want him.