Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Noni Madueke to swap Chelsea for Arsenal?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/02/football-transfer-rumours-noni-madueke-to-swap-chelsea-for-arsenal

A s the Mill sifts through its daily churn, it tries to weed out excessive Manchester United content. But the Old Trafford soap opera is a law unto itself and Wednesday brings more excitable Marcus Rashford gossip, with reports of the striker sizing up a move from United to Bayern Munich. The Sun says that Rashford, who has been linked with Barcelona this summer, is on the German champions’ radar and a bid for the striker could be in the offing, with United wanting £40m.

In potential United incomings news, Ruben Amorim could be set to seize on Internazionale’s post-Champions League final upheaval and move for Davide Frattesi . The midfielder is yet to decide whether he wants to stay at San Siro but United have been in touch with Inter, who are prepared to let him go for about €35m. Spurs have also been linked with Frattesi.

Chelsea’s ever-busy wheelers and dealers are reported to be preparing an offer for the Leicester goalkeeper Mads Hermansen . West Ham are also sniffing around the Danish stopper but Enzo Maresca hopes his previous work with Hermansen at the King Power can tempt him to west London. Heading out of Stamford Bridge might be Noni Madueke , in whom Arsenal are interested and are reported to have tabled a bid. Mikel Arteta also retains an interest in Real Madrid’s Rodrygo , though it’s unclear whether he wants to leave the Bernabéu.

Thomas Frank may have to start life in the Tottenham hot seat without Argentinian Cristian Romero , who could be set for a £56m move to Atlético Madrid, with boss Diego Simeone unsurprisingly liking the cut of his compatriot’s jib.

Another Argentinian attracting interest is Marseille’s defender Leonardo Balerdi , who is on Newcastle’s shopping list. The Ligue 1 club have been reluctant to sell the 26-year-old international but the word is £35m might be enough to lure him to the Toon. Balderdi has previously indicated he could be tempted by a move to Juventus, with their manager, Igor Tudor, showing firm interest. Staying on the subject of toiling Serie A giants, Milan have waved €32m in the direction of Club Brugge for their star midfielder Ardon Jashari .

Newcastle’s pursuit of Anthony Elanga also faces disruption, with Aston Villa increasingly strongly linked with the Nottingham Forest winger. Forest turned down a £45m offer from Newcastle for Elanga earlier in the window and Villa may move to trump that offer for a player valued by his club at £60m. Eddie Howe remains keen though.

Elsewhere in the north-east, Sunderland are apparently preparing an ambitious raid for Lyon’s Georges Mikautadze as clubs pick over the financially stricken French club’s prize assets. The Georgian international striker, who scored 17 goals in Ligue 1 last season, is thought to be available for about £21m but competition for Mikautadze’s services is likely to be fierce.

And West Ham fancy a bit of Borussia Mönchengladbach’s Rocco Reitz . The industrious 23-year-old midfielder could be available for £21m-£25m but the Hammers face competition from Fulham, Brighton, Dortmund and Leipzig.