Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Arsenal join Premier League race for Hugo Ekitike?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/30/football-transfer-rumours-arsenal-join-premier-league-race-for-hugo-ekitike

A s always, every single football team in the country needs a brand new striker to take them from mediocre to champions. Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester United have already taken a long look at Eintracht Frankfurt’s Hugo Ekitike , done the calculations and have not yet signed him. This casual messing about has allowed others to consider their position and Arsenal are now also interested in the Frenchman, who is worth an absolute shedload.

One reason Mikel Arteta may have turned his attention to the Frenchman, is the lack of movement in Arsenal’s pursuit of Sporting striker Viktor Gyökeres . The Swedish international is keen to depart the Portuguese club and he might just get his wish after a bit of complaining. Sporting president Frederico Varandas has admitted the club are willing to accept a fee lower than his €100m (£85.6m) release clause.

Heading out of the Emirates Stadium is midfielder Thomas Partey . The club and player could not agree on terms for a new deal and he will be allowed to leave for free this week, bringing Turkish and Saudi Arabian teams to the party. The Gunners will not be too worried because Martín Zubimendi is set to complete his move from Real Sociedad in the coming days.

Liverpool’s eagerness to sign Marc Guéhi from Crystal Palace could see the club offer up Ben Doak in a part-exchange. The Scottish attacker flourished with Middlesbrough in the Championship but the Eagles will still want plenty of cash to go along with the teenager. Another who may exit Anfield is Darwin Núñez, who accepts his days at Liverpool are numbered and is happy to join Serie A winners Napoli. There is a sticking point in terms of the £20m difference in valuation, though.

Nottingham Forest are close to completing a deal for Botafogo striker Igor Jesus . The Brazilian, who has impressed at the Club World Cup, will cost in the region of £10m but reports he will be joined by Real Mallorca defender Pablo Maffeo at the City Ground are a little premature.

Another Forest target is becoming Germany’s most-wanted man. James McAtee helped England win the European Under-21 Championship but is unlikely to stay at Manchester City , who want £25m for the playmaker. Dortmund, Leverkusen, Eintracht Frankfurt, RB Leipzig and Stuttgart have all watched McAtee and could make a move for the City academy graduate.

Sunderland are keen on adding to the imminent arrival of Reinildo on a free transfer from Atlético Madrid. England Under-21 European Championship winner Charlie Cresswell , currently of Toulouse, is on the radar but the Black Cats face plenty of competition from Premier League rivals for the centre-back.

Enticing offers for Tyrell Malacia is proving difficult for Manchester United. They are still extremely keen to get rid of the left-back and his wages, though, so could accept an offer of a packet of Quavers and a can of Dr Pepper in exchange for his services.

And north of the border, Celtic are very close to signing Albirex Niigata centre-back Hayato Inamura . The 23-year-old Japan international is set for a medical before some i dotting and t crossing.