Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Arsenal and Spurs to battle for Eberechi Eze?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/27/football-transfer-rumours-arsenal-tottenham-eberechi-eze

E veryone t’up north (London) wants Eberechi Eze . Fierce rivals Tottenham and Arsenal are ready to battle it out for the winger, eager to procure his dazzling dribbling and finishing. Crystal Palace know their position in this and are willing to sell, but he will set any suitors back around £68m. Last season the England international scored and created eight goals in 34 league appearances to make him one of the most sought-after attackers in the country.

Spurs do not plan to fund any of their summer business by selling Europa League winner Cristian Romero on the cheap. Atlético Madrid are flirting with the idea of signing him but the £60m sale demands will almost certainly put them off.

Cristhian Mosquera is in talks with Arsenal over a potential move from Valencia . The Spaniard was part of their squad at the European Under-21 Championship and after elimination can focus on finding a new club, although his current employers are asking for £25m. The young centre-back has become a regular at the Mestalla, and can boast 82 appearances in La Liga prior to his 21st birthday, which happens to be this very day. ¡Feliz cumpleaños , Cristhian!

Manchester United need young and hungry players, so they have decided to target a teenage Champions League winner in the form of Paris Saint-Germain midfielder Warren Zaïre-Emery . Ruben Amorim will need to offload a few outcasts soon. Napoli and Juventus are open to signing Jadon Sancho but his £250,000 per week wages are proving a stumbling block.

Aston Villa are interested in bringing Galatasaray midfielder Gabriel Sara back to England. The Brazilian, who previously had a spell with Norwich, has flourish in Turkey, bringing a host of scouts to watch him play, but Unai Emery might be the most eager in acquiring him.

After suffering a bit of pushback from clubs about signing their players, Newcastle are trying to solve their problem with £125m worth of bids on João Pedro , Anthony Elanga and James Trafford . The first two are valued in the region of £50m each by Brighton and Nottingham Forest, respectively, and it seems unlikely that Burnley will allow their No 1 to leave for £25m, but it is good to show willing.

It might seem like Brentford are losing some of their best talents but they are pretty adept when it comes to replacing them. The latest set for a move to west London is Feyenoord’s Antoni Milambo , who will cost around £17m with a further £4.25m in potential add-ons.

Nicolas Kühn was a standout player at Celtic last season, alerting the rest of Europe to his obvious talent. Como have got on the blower to the Scottish champions to see how much the winger would cost but could face competition from Leipzig. Speaking of Celtic, defender Greg Taylor is close to joining PAOK.

And Ruben Selles is eyeing a reunion with Nottingham Forest centre-back Tyler Bindon . The two previously worked together at Reading and the head coach now wants him at Sheffield United.