Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Real Madrid give all-clear for Arsenal to sign Rodrygo?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/04/football-transfer-rumours-real-madrid-give-all-clear-for-arsenal-to-sign-rodrygo

F our days into July, Arsenal fans could be forgiven for getting antsy over their outgoings list outnumbering their incomings by seven to one. If Gunnersaurus had ears they’d be pricking ozone-wards at word that Real Madrid are willing to let Rodrygo leave during the current window. Xabi Alonso seemingly likes the trade-off of losing a player who doesn’t currently waltz into his preferred XI (just 88 mins of action at the Club World Cup to date) and getting a fee not far short of £80m to help continue his reconfiguration at the Bernabéu.

The tricksy 24-year-old is seen as a substantial upgrade on Arsenal’s current threats from the left wing, but his arrival would not necessarily herald the exit of his Brazilian compatriot Gabriel Martinelli. A player who will leave, however, is knack-plagued defender Takehiro Tomiyasu , whose contract is being ripped up. That’s, thankfully, a situation suiting both parties, with the Japan international still almost half a year from returning to action after an endless string of knee twangs.

Despite the relative hush, there is plenty of Stamford Bridge-related hubbub today: Djordje Petrovic has swiftly gone from being a goalkeeper who “might just be the one Chelsea needed all along” at the start of 2024 to being one of Enzo Maresca’s Expendables. Sunderland’s lively window looks likely to feature completion of a £21.5m deal for the Serbian before Monday’s Mill arrives.

Meanwhile, Borussia Dortmund’s Reading-born winger Jamie Gittens is all but Chelsea’s player now, with the German club having gone surprisingly early with a well-wishing statement .

The former Blues forward Tammy Abraham , not that long ago a headline attraction for the Mill, quietly completed a loan move from Roma to Besiktas on Thursday, with “a conditional obligation to buy”.

Speaking of Blues, Birmingham pounced on Thursday to bring Demarai Gray back to where it all began, thus ending his Saudi Pro League adventure with Al-Ettifaq. That spell unfortunately yielded more yellow cards (one) than goals or assists, but his three-year deal offers plenty of scope to improve those numbers for the Championship side.

Elsewhere in the Midlands, Aston Villa are purportedly closing in on Toulouse’s Jaydee Canvot – the 18-year-old, a French youth international centre-back, caught eyes in 18 Ligue 1 outings last season and reports in France suggest that Unai Emery has successfully beckoned the youngster in his club’s direction despite interest from Everton and Bournemouth. A fee in the region of £17m-£20m is said to be plenty, ta.

Finally, a bit of a Mill tap-in to finish, expect Anthony Elanga pen-in-hand pics with various Newcastle-affiliated logos as a background at more or less any time from here. Their improved offer is thought to be just the job for Forest, cheers.