Site: The Guardian
Title: Football transfer rumours: Manchester United switch focus to Ollie Watkins?
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/01/football-transfer-rumours-manchester-united-ollie-watkins-aston-villa-nicolas-jackson

M anchester United’s search for a suitable striker continues to occupy the minds of the gossip-mongers, with Ollie Watkins now reported to be firmly on Ruben Amorim’s radar. As United toil to get a deal for Brentford’s Bryan Mbeumo over the line , amid rumours the Cameroon striker might be persuaded to remain in west London, Aston Villa’s Watkins has emerged as a strong target, the Athletic reports. A deal may however be dependent on Rasmus Højlund being bundled out of the Old Trafford exit door.

United also continue to be dogged by the “How do you solve a problem like Marcus Rashford ?” conundrum; the striker faces starting the season at Old Trafford because Aston Villa will not be taking up the £40m option to sign him.

Instead, Villa are reportedly keen on a swoop for Chelsea’s Nicolas Jackson , as the manager, Unai Emery, pursues a reunion with a forward he worked with at Villarreal. The Senegal striker has had a mixed time of it at Stamford Bridge and may be a handy fit for Villa, who could free up some cash with their selling-the-women’s-team accountancy wheeze .

Monday’s Hugo Etikite rumour had Arsenal muscling their way towards the front of the queue to sign the Eintracht Frankfurt forward. But now Liverpool have been heavily linked with Etikite again, Bild reporting that the Premier League champions have contacted Frankfurt with strong expressions of interest. He’ll end up in the English top flight one way or other, the Mill feels sure.

Heading in the opposite direction could be Luis Díaz , to whom Bayern Munich have taken a fancy. For all the recent focus on their wonderkid Nick Woltemade, the German champions are also keen on an experienced wide attacker and Díaz could fit the bill.

Fulham are preparing a bid for the highly regarded Genk forward Tolu Arokodare , scorer of 17 goals in the Belgian top flight last season. The 6ft 4in Nigerian striker has also attracted interest from Milan and Manchester United, but Fulham have taken their interest the furthest, with exploratory talks having already been held with Arokodare’s people, according to the Sun.

James McAtee ’s success with England’s Under-21s has upped both his price tag and the number of clubs linked with him. Leeds, who tried to sign the Manchester City midfielder on loan in January, still want to lure him across the Pennines but face competition from the Bundesliga in the form of Borussia Dortmund, Leipzig, Stuttgart, Eintracht Frankfurt and Leverkusen, say the Times. And City will want around £30m.

Elsewhere, Richarlison could be heading to Galatasaray after being given approval to do one from Tottenham. Also Turkey-bound, it seems, is Tammy Abraham , who is due to join Besiktas from Roma in a €15m deal.

In the Championship, Hull are close to finalising a deal for Aston Villa’s Louie Barry , who tore up League One in the first half of last season when on loan at Stockport before an injury-dogged loan spell at the MKM Stadium after Christmas. Jonjo Shelvey has also been training with the Tigers.

Elsewhere in the English second-tier, West Brom have been linked with the QPR forward Charlie Kelman , League One’s top scorer last season while on loan at Leyton Orient, while TV’s Wrexham appear to have overreached themselves in a bid for Fulham’s Tom Cairney , but have been strongly linked with Sheffield Wednesday’s Barry Bannan and Reading ’s Charlie Savage as Phil Parkinson seeks midfield reinforcements.