Site: The Guardian
Title: Graham Hansen’s late winner downs Finland and puts Norway on verge of last eight
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/06/norway-finland-euro-2025-match-report

Norway stand on the verge of qualification to the knockout stages of the European Championship after grinding out a 2-1 victory over a courageous Finland. Caroline Graham Hansen’s 84th-minute winner in Sion broke Helmarit hearts after Oona Sevenius had cancelled out Eva Nystrom’s unfortunate early own goal.

In the shadow of the cloudy mountains that surround the Stade Tourbillon, it had been a turbulent evening for a Norway side that continues to confuse and frustrate. It proved far from a convincing outing for them once again as they struggled against hard-working opposition who dominated much of the encounter.

Finland have been one of the surprises of the tournament so far. The lowest-ranked team in Group A have impressed with their midfield press allowing them to dominate central areas and their ability to break at pace backed up by their energetic wing-backs Katariina Kosola and Emma Koivisto.

Marko Saloranta opted to make just one change from their opening day victory over Iceland. Sevenius is among several promising young players coming through the ranks and the Rosengard forward came in for Sanni Franssi.

Norway’s Gemma Grainger made just one change from their unconvincing win over hosts Switzerland with Mathilde Harviken replacing Maren Mjelde in defence. They started brightly enough and with their forward players occupying their more traditional positions, they found early joy.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/3ccbebe16c0985f5e7b5d96508969e0944cac9d4/0_0_5142_3428/master/5142.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: The Haut de Cry mountain and the Basilique de Valere loom over the game in Sion.Photograph: James Gill/Danehouse/Getty Images

With the first attack of the game, the ever-dangerous Graham Hansen ghosted past Joanna Tynnilä before sending a low ball in. Aware that Frida Maanum was lurking behind her, Nystrom stuck out a leg to send it unwittingly into the back of her own net.

Saloranta’s side, however, are a plucky outfit who were determined not to let that moment dictate the rest of the match. Their packed midfield, anchored by Eveliina Summanen and inspired by tireless Oona Siren, gave Norway little joy. They controlled 67% of possession in the first 25 minutes, an indication of their growing confidence and success going forward. Cecilie Fiskerstrand was the first of the two goalkeepers to be truly tested, producing a fingertip stop to deny an instinctive half-volley from the Finland captain Linda Sällström.

Norway had chances of their own. Ingrid Engen was the first to crash a header off the bar before Anna Koivunen tipped a Vilde Bøe Risa corner onto a post. The Finland keeper was then called on to make a superb save to deny Ada Hegerberg.

Finland were worthy of their equaliser, however, when it did eventually come. Splitting open the Norwegian defence, Siren fed Sevenius who sent her shot flying into the net. The celebrations from players and coach alike said it all as Saloranta danced down the touchline in delight.

A clearly frustrated Grainger rang the changes at half-time. It did not have the desired effect as Finland continued to press forward and when they reflect on this one, they will rue their missed opportunities.

With Finland’s energy levels dipping, Norway saw the opportunity to go for the jugular. There were warning signs before the winner when Koivunen was called on to deny an acrobatic effort from Guro Reiten and Graham Hansen inexplicably skied a shot from an unmarked position in the box. She was not going to make the same mistake twice and when she was afforded space once more, she floated in what looked like a cross that clipped the far post and in.

With Finland unable to find a late reply, Norway will have a keen eye on the later kick off in Group A. Should Switzerland fail to beat Iceland, Grainger’s side will progress to the quarter-finals with one game to spare.