Site: The Guardian
Title: Heat health alerts and hosepipe bans across England as third heatwave takes hold
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jul/11/heat-health-alerts-hosepipe-ban-england-third-heatwave

Amber heat health alerts have been issued across parts of England and hosepipe bans imposed in various locations as the third heatwave of the summer takes hold.

The heat health warning announced by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) came into effect at noon on Friday and covers the East Midlands, West Midlands, south-east, south-west, east of England and London until 9am on Monday.

This latest heat health warning comes as hot and dry weather scorches England, with temperatures expected to rise further over the weekend.

Temperatures could reach 32C in parts of central and southern England on Friday, with the north-east, north-west and Yorkshire and the Humber to be covered by a yellow heat health alert from midday.

The alerts warn of the potential for a rise in deaths , particularly among those aged 65 and over, or with health conditions, because of the heat.

Households in Yorkshire were the first to be hit with a hosepipe ban, which came into effect on Sunday, with restrictions following in Kent and Sussex.

Yorkshire Water brought in restrictions on using hosepipes for activities such as watering the garden, cleaning cars and filling paddling pools, which it said is part of its efforts to protect supplies in the face of yet more dry weather forecast for the coming weeks.

South East Water said demand for drinking water in the counties had reached “record levels since May”, adding: “This situation has left us with no choice but to restrict the use of hosepipes and sprinklers, so we can help our reservoirs and underground water storage recover.”

It means people are banned from using a hosepipe to water gardens and plants, clean vehicles, fill swimming pools or ponds or clean paths, walls or windows. The ban comes into effect from 18 July.

Customers who ignore the bans could face fines of up to £1,000.

Possible highs of 33C on Saturday mean this third heatwave of the summer will fall short of the top temperatures of 34.7C recorded earlier in July , but it will be more widespread, the Met Office said.

The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) has urged people to drink water regularly, seek shade and use sunscreen.

Steve Cole, the policy director at RoSPA, said: “Heat is no longer just a holiday perk, it’s a growing public health risk.

“We’re seeing more frequent and intense heatwaves, both in the UK and globally, and the data shows a clear rise in heat-related illness and fatalities.”