Site: The Guardian
Title: Heavy rain lashes the east coast as vigorous coastal low intensifies off NSW
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2025/jul/01/nsw-weather-warnings-forecast-coastal-low-rain-wind

Destructive winds and heavy rainfall are hitting large swathes of the New South Wales coastline, with some areas already reaching more than 100mm, as a vigorous coastal low continues to intensify offshore.

The complex and rapidly deepening system was expected to slowly track southwards, approaching the central NSW coast later on Tuesday before turning and moving offshore into the Tasman Sea on Wednesday, according to the Bureau of Meteorology.

The NSW State Emergency Service had already deployed vehicles, helicopters and personnel to areas likely to be heavily impacted.

- Sign up for Guardian Australia’s breaking news email

The Bureau had as of Tclassified the system as a “vigorous coastal low”, and not an “east coast low”, nor a “bomb cyclone” as some reported.

Bureau meteorologist Helen Reid said the current weather system was more mobile than an east coast low.

While the low-pressure system early on Tuesday had some similarities, there were some important differences in physical characteristics, duration and moisture, she said.

A severe weather warning was in place for people in the Mid North Coast, Metropolitan, Northern Tablelands and parts of Northern Rivers, Hunter, Illawarra, South Coast, Central Tablelands and North West Slopes and Plains districts.

Weather warnings were issued for Taree, Newcastle, Gosford, Sydney, Wollongong and Port Macquarie

The mid north coast region is an area of concern for emergency services because of the soil is still saturated from the May floods.

Reid said the wind and rain was likely to increase into the afternoon and overnight.

With the rain continuing, some places along the coast could reach over 100mm of rainfall, and “even a couple that might get up to the 200mm mark”, Reid said.

By 7.30am on Tuesday, Jervis Bay had recorded 109mm, Currarong 85mm and Williamtown 70mm. Several places in the Northern Rivers had already seen 40mm of rainfall, she said.

The bureau was also warning of destructive winds averaging 60 – 70km/h, with peak gusts of up to 125km/h possible.

“Winds could bring down trees or tree limbs, lead to dangerous driving conditions due to crosswinds or debris being thrown across the roads, and lead to power outages and possible damage to cars and property,” Reid said.

Conditions were expected to be treacherous on the water from Seal Rocks to Batemans Bay, with the potential for waves up to seven metres, and could cause coastal erosion and possible inundation of low-lying areas along the eastern foreshore.

Damaging surf was also forecast for an area of coastline from Forster to Moruya Heads, including parts of Hunter, Metropolitan, Illawarra, South Coast and Mid North Coast Forecast Districts. Conditions could lead to coastal erosion and damage to coastal infrastructure.

Widespread heavy rainfall could cause flooding. Although there was some uncertainty over the exact location and timing of the heaviest falls.

Catchments likely to be affected included: Wallis Lake, Myall River, Wollombi Brook and Lower Hunter River, Upper Nepean River, Hawkesbury and Lower Nepean Rivers, Upper Coxs River, Colo River, Macdonald River, Northern Sydney, Southern Sydney, Parramatta River, Cooks River, Georges and Woronora Rivers, Illawarra Coast, St Georges Basin and the Snowy River.

The SES urged people to be vigilant, and to prepare by tying down any loose items, to avoid them becoming projectiles.

“We are encouraging communities to start preparing their homes,” SES deputy commissioner, Debbie Platz said on Monday. “It’s really critical that you clean your gutters, that you move items that are loose … such as trampolines and outdoor furniture, tie them down or move them to a secure location.”

“Please move any vehicles that you have away from any large trees,” she said.

“On Wednesday, the focus for the rain will shift further south, scattered showers and rain areas will still impact the east coast, between the mid north coast to the Victorian border, but the heavier falls will be focused through the Illawarra and the northern parts of the southern coastal district,” Reid said.

– with Australian Associated Press