Site: The Guardian
Title: Idaho student murders suspect reportedly agrees to plead guilty on all counts
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/30/idaho-killings-suspect

Bryan Kohberger, the man accused of killing four Idaho college students in 2022, has agreed to plead guilty to all counts, a move that would spare him from the death penalty, ABC News reported on Monday, citing a letter sent to victims’ family members.

Kohberger, who previously pleaded not guilty on charges of murder in the fatal stabbings, will be sentenced to four consecutive life sentences and waives all right to appeal, according to ABC News.

Kohberger was charged with four counts of first-degree murder for the deaths of Madison Mogen, 21; Kaylee Goncalves, 21; Xana Kernodle, 20; and Ethan Chapin, 20, who were stabbed to death in an off-campus residence in Moscow, Idaho, two years ago on 13 November 2022. He was also charged with burglary. He will be sentenced to the maximum 10 years for the burglary count.

The family of Goncalves, who had backed the state pursuing the death penalty, appeared to confirm the plea deal in a post on social media . “It’s true! We are beyond furious at the State of Idaho. They have failed us. Please give us some time. This was very unexpected. We appreciate all your love and support.”

The sentencing is expected to take place in late July, prosecutors said, as long as Kohberger enters the guilty plea as expected at a change of plea hearing scheduled for Wednesday. The trial was originally set to begin in August.

But a series of pre-trial rulings had gone against Kohberger. His defense attorneys had requested a trial delay, citing in part intense publicity around the case, generated in part by a recent NBC Dateline special they claim was prejudicial to their client because it contained apparent prosecution leaks in violation of a non-dissemination order.

There were further concerns for prosecutors. In the event they secured a conviction for the murders, they could have ended up with a life sentence if jurors failed to reach an unanimous decision in death penalty phase of the trial. Legal analysts said that without a stated motive for the killings, jurors might not agree to the death sentence.

Police found the bodies of the four University of Idaho students at the house they rented off campus early on the morning of 13 November 2022.

Goncalves, Kernodle and Mogen lived at the house; Chapin was dating Kernodle. All four attended the University of Idaho.

There were no signs of forced entry. Two other housemates, whom the police do not consider suspects, slept through everything.

The killings launched a seven-week manhunt and rocked the small college town of Moscow, where residents lived in fear of a serial killer in their midst.

Kohberger, 29, a former criminal justice student at Washington State University, was arrested on 30 December 2022 at his parents’ house in Pennsylvania after weeks of investigation. It later turned out that investigators had been tracking Kohberger from Idaho.

His DNA was matched to DNA found at the crime scene on a knife sheath and his cellphone data or surveillance video showed that him having visited the area at least a dozen times before the killings and that he traveled in the region that night.

Anna Betts and Edward Helmore contributed reporting