Site: The Guardian
Title: Kirk close to return at Linköping after sacking over relationship with player
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/30/willie-kirk-return-management-linkoping-sacking-relationship-with-player

The former Leicester and Everton manager Willie Kirk is closing in on a return to football after holding advanced talks with the Swedish top-flight women’s team Linköping about becoming their head coach.

Kirk, who also managed Hibernian and Bristol City before a spell as Manchester United’s assistant manager, has been out of management since he was sacked by Leicester in March 2024 because he had a relationship with one of the club’s players. Later last year, in an interview with the Daily Mail , Kirk said: “I’ve made a mistake and I’ve been punished for my mistake. I take responsibility for that.”

Kirk’s proposed move, which could be announced this week, was first reported by Sportbladet , which said Linköping are set to sack their manager, Jonne Kunnas. The team are 13th, in the relegation zone, but have a strong history in the women’s game, having won the Damallsvenskan title in 2009, 2016 and 2017.

Kirk is a former Scottish Cup winner with Hibernian and led Everton to a Women’s FA Cup final at Wembley in 2020, where his side lost to Manchester City after extra time. He also oversaw Bristol City’s promotion to the top flight in 2016.

Liverpool have confirmed that their vice-captain Taylor Hinds is leaving when her contract expires on Monday. The defender spent five years with the club and helped them win promotion to the WSL with the second-tier title in 2022.

The Guardian revealed last week that Hinds is to move to Arsenal . Liverpool did offer a new deal to Hinds – who can play as a full-back or as a attacking wing-back – but the club respects and understands her decision to move to play Champions League football with the European champions.

In a message to Liverpool fans, Hinds said: “Dear Reds, I’m sorry I haven’t had the chance to say a proper goodbye. I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for making me feel so welcome when I joined back in 2020. I wish nothing but continued success for this team and this club. I’m incredibly proud to have been part of this club and to have worn the shirt – it’s truly been a privilege.”