Site: The Guardian
Title: Kyle Walker closes in on shock £5m move to Burnley from Manchester City
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/04/kyle-walker-shock-5m-transfer-burnley-manchester-city

Kyle Walker is poised to make a surprise move from Manchester City to Burnley after the two clubs agreed a £5m deal for the right-back, who will sign a two-year deal at Turf Moor.

The 35-year-old England international, who spent the second half of last season out on loan at Milan , played alongside Scott Parker at Tottenham and will reunite with his former teammate once he has completed a medical. Burnley have been seeking Premier League experience in the transfer market as they bid to survive in the top flight after earning promotion from the Championship.

The move to Burnley will allow Walker to stay in the north-west, something he has been eager to do following his six months in Italy. Walker had interest from across the globe but wanted to stay close to his family. Everton were previously interested in signing the defender but Walker has eventually been lured to Burnley.

Walker, who has 96 international caps, won 17 trophies during his time with City but was keen for a new challenge last season. Pep Guardiola sanctioned the temporary move to Milan and left him out of the Club World Cup squad, signifying he would not return to the first-team fold once his loan had come to an end.

He will become the club’s fourth signing of the summer after fellow defenders Axel Tuanzebe, Quilindschy Hartman and goalkeeper Max Weiss.

Meanwhile, Newcastle have agreed a £55m fee with Nottingham Forest for Anthony Elanga, with the winger set to complete a move to the Champions League side in the coming days.

The winger’s personal terms are not thought to be an issue and the signing of the Sweden international will end a year-long pursuit by Eddie Howe. Newcastle tried to sign Elanga last summer but the Forest owner, Evangelos Marinakis, was adamant he would not be sold.

A fee of £55m was seen as too good to refuse for a player the club purchased for £15m two seasons ago from Manchester United.

The 23-year-old has excelled at the City Ground helping Forest to qualify for Europe for the first time in more than 30 years. Last season he scored six goals and created 11 more in his 38 appearances as Forest finished seventh in the league.

Forest will make the 22-year-old PSV winger Johan Bakayoko, who has been tracked by Borussia Dortmund and by rival Premier League clubs, a prominent target if Elanga departs.