Site: The Guardian
Title: London’s often unruly and overpriced pedicabs to be regulated
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jun/26/london-pedicabs-to-be-regulated-amid-public-concern-over-safety-noise-and-cost

Transport for London is pushing ahead with plans to regulate pedicabs after a consultation showed overwhelming public support to bring the often unruly and extortionately priced vehicles under control.

Pedicabs have become an ever more common sight in the capital, including the garish “party” cycle rickshaws, known for playing loud music and fleecing tourists.

TfL said regulation would ensure that the vehicles were driven, maintained and operated in a safe and professional manner.

More than 95% of the 7,700 people who responded said pedicab drivers should pass UK criminal background checks, be insured and have their music kept in check.

More than 75% said they felt unsafe when using a pedicab in London . Fewer than one in 30 believed that the fare was reasonable, and only 11% reported paying the fare they had expected to be charged.

Despite it not being a question in the consultation , more than a quarter of respondents called for a ban on the trade.

However, TfL is planning instead to start issuing licences for drivers under a regime to be launched next year, subject to further consultation with those working in the industry.

While some have seen the pedicabs as a colourful addition to London’s nightlife , numerous customers have reported being ripped off to the tune of hundreds of pounds.

Ros Morgan, chief executive of Heart of London Business Alliance, said that the strong support for a crackdown was no surprise and that regulation could “not come soon enough”, adding: “For far too long, members of the public have been at the mercy of rogue operators who do nothing to enhance the reputation of the West End.”

Will Norman, London’s walking and cycling commissioner, said: “Pedicabs should be a fun and sustainable way to explore what our city has to offer, but without regulation some drivers are behaving unsafely or antisocially and charging extortionate prices. The mayor and I have always been clear that regulation is needed to ensure pedicabs can operate safely in London, and this report shows that Londoners agree.”

Helen Chapman, TfL’s director of licensing and regulation, said pedicabs could be a “green way to see the capital” but had an impact on the safety of the road network. She added: “Following this first consultation on pedicabs, we are using the responses and comments provided to ensure that the changes work for everyone. We look forward to working with the pedicab industry to ensure it is run fairly and safely and continues to be a sustainable mode of transport in the capital.”

TfL was given legal powers to regulate pedicabs in 2024, under legislation brought by Rishi Sunak’s government to combat what he described as the “scourge of pedicabs”.