Site: The Guardian
Title: Meghan Markle launches ‘thoughtful’ collection of wines
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jul/01/meghan-markle-wine

Meghan Markle has announced her latest foray into lifestyle branding, with the Duchess of Sussex expanding As Ever product line now set to feature a “thoughtful” collection of wines.

A press release on Tuesday described the first wine to become available as “a light, fresh, and effortlessly celebratory 2023 Napa Valley Rosé, thoughtfully curated by Meghan, Duchess of Sussex”.

“This debut rosé marks the beginning of As Ever’s thoughtful expansion into wine, with a Méthode Champenoise Napa Valley sparkling wine planned for the near future and additional varietals to follow,” it said.

Meghan’s team also set the stage for where the wine might be best consumed: “Designed for summer’s best moments – from lunches that turn into dinners and sun-drenched weekends where the only thing louder than the music is the laughter.”

The manufacturer, Fairwinds Estate in Napa valley, located six hours drive from the Montecito home Markle shares with Prince Harry, also makes wine for Barry Manilow, the estate of John Wayne and the TV series Yellowstone.

Other celebrities who have also put their names to wine in recent years include Cameron Diaz (Avaline), director Francis Ford Coppola, Post Malone ( Maison No 9) and the ever-entrepreneurial Snoop Dogg, with 19 Crimes Cali Red.

Some celebrities have done well with alcohol ventures, including Brad Pitt, whose Miravel rosé brand is valued at around $200m, and George Clooney’s Casa Amigos tequila brand, established in 2103 and sold for $1bn four years later.

The bespoke or craft wine business is rapidly growing. Estimated at $35bn globally in 2019, it is projected to reach almost $49bn by 2027.

Meghan’s growing list of As Ever products includes a crepe mix, a shortbread mix with flower sprinkles, apricot spread in “keepsake packaging”, a limited edition orange blossom honey, and various teas. All products on As Ever’s website were sold out as of Tuesday morning, along with the reassuring message to consumers: “More coming soon.”