Site: The Guardian
Title: Michael Madsen, star of Reservoir Dogs, Kill Bill and Donnie Brasco, dies aged 67
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jul/03/michael-madsen-death

The actor Michael Madsen has died aged 67 at his home in Malibu, according to authorities and his representatives. No foul play is suspected, the sheriff’s department confirmed, after deputies responded to the Los Angeles county home following a call to the emergency services on Thursday morning.

He was pronounced dead at 8.25am. In an email, Madsen’s manager, Ron Smith, confirmed his client had died from cardiac arrest.

A statement from Smith and another manager, Susan Ferris, along with publicist Liz Rodriguez said:

“In the last two years Michael Madsen has been doing some incredible work with independent film including upcoming feature films Resurrection Road, Concessions and Cookbook for Southern Housewives, and was really looking forward to this next chapter in his life.

“Michael was also preparing to release a new book called Tears for My Father: Outlaw Thoughts and Poems, currently being edited. Michael Madsen was one of Hollywood’s most iconic actors, who will be missed by many.”

Over a four-decade career, Madsen had won acclaim for his portrayals of often enigmatic and frequently wise-cracking tough guys in films including Kill Bill: Vol. 1, Reservoir Dogs, Thelma & Louise and Donnie Brasco.

He also features in later Tarantino films including The Hateful Eight and Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. Other credits among the 346 listed on IMDb include The Doors, Free Willy, Species, Die Another Day, Sin City and Scary Movie 4.

Madsen began his career in Chicago as part of the Steppenwolf Theatre company as as apprentice to John Malkovich before debuting on the big screen in 1983 sci-fi WarGames.

Speaking to the Hollywood Reporter in 2018, Madsen spoke about his industry typecasting, calling fame “a two-edged sword. There are a lot of blessings but also a lot of heavy things that come with it. I think it has a lot to do with the characters I’ve played. I think I’ve been more believable than I should have been. I think people really fear me. They see me and go: ‘Holy shit, there’s that guy!’

“But I’m not that guy. I’m just an actor. I’m a father, I’ve got seven children. I’m married, I’ve been married 20 years. When I’m not making a movie, I’m home, in pajamas, watching The Rifleman on TV, hopefully with my 12-year-old making me a cheeseburger. I sure as hell had my rabble-rousing days, but sooner or later you have to get over that and move on.”

Madsen missed out on a number of significant film roles which might have expanded the scope of his career, including the lead in LA Confidential. Speaking to the Guardian in 2004 , he expressed frustration with some fellow film-makers for passing him over, as well as what he perceived as a wider lack of care within the industry.

“When I was really down and out,” he said, “and I was just ready to flatline, you would think that an element of Hollywood would try to hold you up, just keep you going. I mean, everybody pretty much knows that I’m a father. A lot of people have made a lot of money with me involved in their projects, so if only for that reason. But no – nothing was happening.”

More to follow …