Site: The Guardian
Title: Milos Kerkez ‘honoured’ to make £40m move to Liverpool from Bournemouth
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jun/26/liverpool-complete-40m-signing-of-milos-kerkez-from-bournemouth-transfer-window

Liverpool have pushed their summer spending to £170m after completing the signing of Milos Kerkez for £40m from Bournemouth. The left-back follows the arrivals of Bayer Leverkusen’s Jeremie Frimpong and Florian Wirtz at the Premier League champions.

Arne Slot promised he would add “extra weapons” to build on the title success and the recruitment may not be over. Liverpool have worked quickly to secure the trio’s signature as Slot aims to replicate domestic form in the Champions League, where they went out at the last 16 stage.

Giorgi Mamardashvili will also be part of the revamped squad. The goalkeeper will join on 1 July from Valencia, lifting transfer expenditure to almost £200m.

“It’s a real honour for me, a privilege to come to play for one of the biggest clubs in the world, [the] biggest club in England,” said Kerkez, who played 74 times for Bournemouth after joining from AZ Alkmaar in 2023. “I’m just really, really happy and excited.

“After this, I’ll go home and enjoy a few days. Then I can’t wait to come back and put the training kit on and start to train and prepare for the season.”

Liverpool are also targeting the Crystal Palace centre-back Marc Guéhi with Jarell Quansah set to join Bayern Leverkusen for £35m. The Reds could make a move for a new striker should they offload Darwin Nunez, who has attracted interest from Italy and Saudi Arabia. The club are long-term admirers of Alexander Isak, but have yet to make an offer for the Newcastle forward.

Frimpong replaces Trent Alexander-Arnold on the right, while Kerkez will compete with Andy Robertson and Kostas Tsimikas at left-back, although one of the incumbent duo could be allowed to depart if a suitable offer is received.

Kerkez becomes the third Hungarian on Liverpool’s books, along with Dominik Szoboszlai and goalkeeper Armin Pecsi, who has arrived this summer from Puskás Akadémia.