Site: The Guardian
Title: Musician found guilty of murder of teacher
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/feb/04/ukcrime

A musician obsessed with strangulation, necrophilia and violent sex was today convicted of strangling a schoolteacher to fulfil his "bizarre and macabre" fantasies and then storing her body in a box for 35 days.

Graham Coutts, 35, of Hove, East Sussex, murdered Jane Longhurst, then 31, whose naked body was found on Wiggonholt Common, near Pulborough, West Sussex, on April 19 last year, and showed "not one jot of remorse".

Judge Richard Brown sentenced Coutts to mandatory life imprisonment and ordered that he must serve a minimum of 30 years. The judge told Coutts: "In seeking perverted sexual gratification by way of your sordid and evil fantasies, you have taken her life and devastated the lives of those she loved and of those who loved her."

Coutts had kept her body in a box in his shed for 11 days, before moving it to a storage unit in Brighton for a further two weeks. He had denied murder and had claimed Ms Longhurst consented to asphyxial sex on March 14 last year during which he tied a pair of tights around the her neck.

But his claims were rejected by a jury at Lewes crown court, which unanimously found him guilty of murder after deliberating for just over nine hours.

Judge Brown said: "Everything that this court has heard about Jane Longhurst shows her to have been the sort of person whose life enriched all those who came into contact with her.

"Her undoubted love of her partner, her music and her life, screamed out of every page of the evidence I have heard in this case ... by persisting in your denials, you have put those loved ones through the ordeal of this courtroom and have forced them to relive the last moments of her life and the unbelievable degradation of her body. You have shown not one jot of remorse."

Members of Ms Longhurst's family shouted "yes", and "pervert" and "pig", as the defendant was taken down to begin his sentence.

Coutts attacked the talented viola player and special-needs teacher at his ground floor flat following a chance phone call on her day off. She called to have a chat with Coutts's pregnant girlfriend Lisa Stephens, 37, but ended up agreeing to meet the defendant for a swim, the prosecutor John Kelsey-Fry QC told the court on the opening day of the trial.

Coutts persuaded her to go back to his flat where he strangled her with a pair of nylon tights, which were later found embedded in her neck.

As he killed her, he "had his way with her", satisfying a "bizarre and macabre" lifelong desire to rape, strangle and kill a woman.

Coutts, who confessed to having a fetish for women's necks, then placed the body in the foetal position in a cardboard box, which he kept in the garden shed. But worried Ms Stephens might find his "trophy", Coutts used a false name to hire a five-foot-wide storage unit in Brighton, where he kept the body, visiting it 10 times.

On April 18 the smell of the decomposing corpse, which had been detected by staff at the Big Yellow Storage Company, forced Coutts to move it.

The following day he drove the body to an RSPB bird sanctuary on Wiggonholt Common, near Pulborough, West Sussex, where he set it alight with petrol.

The trial heard that Coutts had surfed the internet for violent images of strangled dead women on websites featuring necrophilia, asphyxiation and rape during a seven-year addiction to pornography.

Records taken from his computer revealed he used the web to fuel his fantasy on the day before Ms Longhurst was murdered, and again after he had burnt her body.

Detectives searched the unit rented by Coutts and found a catalogue of damning evidence. Inside a box was a condom with Coutts's semen on the inside and on which was found Ms Longhurst's DNA. Also found were her clothes, swimming costume, mobile phone and purse, together with a petrol can.

When Coutts was arrested on April 25 and questioned by police, he remained silent, saying only: "I can't talk about it." But six months later he invented an extraordinary defence, claiming Ms Longhurst had consented to asphyxial sex on March 14 after falling into his arms while upset.

The jury dismissed Coutts's claim that Ms Longhurst held his hand to her throat, squeezing it harder, before agreeing to try something "different". Minutes after tying the tights around her throat, Coutts claimed she died suddenly on his chest.

The defendant also said he had failed to reveal what he had done with Ms Longhurst's body in a desperate attempt to protect his unborn twins. He feared Miss Stephens, who gave birth on October 11, would miscarry.

Ms Longhurst's mother, Liz, sister Sue and partner, Malcolm Sentance, sat quietly throughout the 11-day trial.