Site: The Guardian
Title: Naga Munchetty: ‘When did I last cry? Watching Crystal Palace win the FA Cup final’
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2025/jul/12/naga-munchetty-bbc-breakfast-presenter-interview

B orn in London, Naga Munchetty, 50, read English at the University of Leeds and then studied journalism. She began her career in print media at the Evening Standard and the Observer. She went on to work for Reuters Financial Television and CNBC Europe and later joined Channel 4 News. In 2008, she became an anchor on BBC’s Working Lunch. She now hosts BBC Breakfast on TV and presents her own show on BBC Radio 5 Live. Her book, It’s Probably Nothing: Critical Conversations on the Women’s Health Crisis (And How to Thrive Despite It) , is available now. She is married and lives in Hertfordshire.

What is your earliest memory? Having stitches in my chin when I was about three. I’d fallen down the stairs and a bit of metal went through my jaw – I remember screaming as the doctor stitched me up.

What would your superpower be? I can sleep any time, any place, anywhere.

What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? Self-flagellation.

What is the trait you most deplore in others? Bullying.

Describe yourself in three words Loyal, relentless, goofy.

Who would play you in the film of your life? Am I allowed three? Zoë Kravitz, Halle Berry and Zoe Saldaña.

Which words or phrases do you most overuse? Mate.

What was your most embarrassing moment? I was 17 and about to go on a first date with my first boyfriend. I was so desperate for my mum not to meet him that I was trying to get to the door before she did. I ran down the stairs as she opened it, and slid down the last five steps on my arse.

What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you? It would be a racist comment.

Would you choose fame or anonymity? Anonymity.

What do you owe your parents? A good work ethic.

What is the worst job you’ve done? Double-glazing sales when I was about 16 – on the phone, cold calling. Horrendous.

What has been your biggest disappointment? Not being a scratch golfer.

If you could edit your past, what would you change? All the times I was mean to someone.

When did you last cry, and why? The FA Cup final, watching Crystal Palace win.

What single thing would improve the quality of your life? Being able to cram the quality of eight hours’ sleep into four.

Would you rather have more sex, money or fame? Sex.

What is the most important lesson life has taught you? Worry about the things you can control and don’t worry about the things you can’t.

Tell us a secret Everything I do has to be done in whole numbers or groups of five. So, if I’m on the running machine, I have to finish on a multiple of five time wise or distance wise.

How would you like to be remembered? By my friends and loved ones as someone who loved ferociously and always had their back.