Site: The Guardian
Title: Obama calls Trump’s USAID closure a ‘travesty’ as report warns of extra 14 million deaths by 2030
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2025/jul/01/obama-bush-trump-usaid-closure-lancet-report-warns-extra-deaths

Barack Obama and George W Bush have criticised the closure of the US Agency for International Development (USAID), as a study warned it would result in “a staggering number” of avoidable deaths.

The former US presidents made rare public criticisms of the Trump administration as they took part in a video farewell for USAID staffers on its last day as an independent organisation.

In March, the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, announced that 83% of USAID’s programmes had been cancelled. The agency is being folded into the state department, where it is to be replaced by a successor organisation called America First.

A study published in the Lancet found the cuts could cause more than 14 million additional deaths by 2030, with a third of those among children.

USAID funding for health care, nutrition, humanitarian aid, development, education and related sectors have helped prevent more than 91 million deaths in low- and middle-income countries over the past two decades, the multinational group of researchers calculated.

They concluded: “Unless the abrupt funding cuts announced and implemented in the first half of 2025 are reversed, a staggering number of avoidable deaths could occur by 2030.”

For many of the world’s poorer countries “the resulting shock would be similar in scale to a global pandemic or a major armed conflict”, they said, but “would stem from a conscious and avoidable policy choice”.

USAID was founded six decades ago by president John F Kennedy and had, until recently, enjoyed broad bipartisan support.

However, it was aggressively targeted by the current administration. Donald Trump claimed the agency was run by “radical left lunatics” and rife with “tremendous fraud”. Elon Musk called it “a criminal organisation”.

In a recorded message played in a video conference for USAID staffers on Monday, Obama said that dismantling the agency was “a colossal mistake”.

The call was closed to the media, but parts of the video were shared with the Associated Press.

“Gutting USAID is a travesty, and it’s a tragedy. Because it’s some of the most important work happening anywhere in the world,” said Obama, crediting the organisation with saving lives and playing a role in economic growth that turned recipients into US trade partners.

He predicted that “sooner or later, leaders on both sides of the aisle will realise how much you are needed”.

In his message, Bush spoke about cuts to the President’s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief (Pepfar) , which is credited with saving more than 25 million lives. He said: “Is it in our national interests that 25 million people who would have died now live? I think it is, and so do you.”

Singer Bono recited a poem he had written for the occasion, telling staffers: “They called you crooks/When you were the best of us.”