Site: The Guardian
Title: Rachel Reeves needs wider headroom against fiscal rules, ex-Bank of England deputy says
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/business/2025/jul/04/rachel-reeves-needs-wider-headroom-against-fiscal-rules-ex-bank-of-england-deputy-says

The former Bank of England deputy governor Charlie Bean has urged Rachel Reeves to create much wider headroom against her fiscal rules – a decision likely to require significant tax rises or spending cuts.

Bean suggested that the current slim margin of less than £10bn, had led the chancellor to “fine-tune” the government’s tax and spending plans to meet the Office for Budget Responsibility’s (OBR) forecasts five years ahead.

“Government spending is about one and a quarter trillion, so £10bn is a small number … and it is a small number in the context of typical forecasting errors,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.

He added: “She should aim to operate with a larger margin of headroom, so previous chancellors have typically operated with headroom of the order of £30bn.

“Because she has chosen about a third of that … it is very easy for numbers to go in the wrong direction and she finds she has to neurotically fine-tune taxes to control the OBR forecast that is several years ahead.”

Bean, who is also a former member of the OBR’s budget responsibility committee, added: “The original sin is that she should not have chosen to operate with such a tight margin of error.”

Reeves increased taxes by a historic £40bn in her budget last October. However, with most of the proceeds earmarked for public services, she left herself on track to meet her strict fiscal rules with a relatively slim margin.

That “headroom” was set to be wiped out before the spring statement in March , prompting the scramble for savings that led to the £5bn cuts to disability benefits, which Labour dropped this week after a backbench revolt.

Reeves’s team privately acknowledge that the small headroom of less than £10bn she left herself against the forecasts has contributed to the challenges of the past 12 months – but argue that she had little choice given the poor fiscal inheritance left by the Tories.

The chancellor is widely expected to have to increase taxes in her autumn budget to close the gap created by U-turns on disability benefits and the winter fuel allowance, and because of the prospect of weaker economic forecasts.

She insisted she was “cracking on with the job” on Thursday, after a tumultuous day on Wednesday in which bond markets dumped UK government debt amid speculation about the chancellor’s future.

Creating an additional £20bn of fiscal headroom, as Bean suggested, would require tax rises equivalent to 2p on the basic and higher rates of income tax.