Site: The Guardian
Title: Racing’s leaders lost control of narrative in Oisin Murphy drink-driving case
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/jul/04/horse-racings-leaders-lost-control-of-narrative-in-oisin-murphy-drink-driving-case

B efore passing sentence on Oisin Murphy after the champion jockey had pleaded guilty to a drink-driving offence at Reading magistrates court on Thursday, Sam Goozee, the district judge, reminded him that he was “lucky that neither you nor your passenger nor any member of the public” had been seriously hurt when Murphy crashed his Mercedes into a tree in the early hours of 27 April.

Given the circumstances, he could fairly have added that the sport that made Murphy rich and famous has also been fortunate to emerge (relatively) unscathed from the latest nadir in his chequered career.

Murphy was so full of booze when he got behind the wheel that night that he was still nearly two times over the legal limit of 35 micrograms of alcohol per 100ml of breath when he was tested around seven hours after the crash. As Murphy said in a statement on X after the hearing, there was “no excuse” for what he did.

And yet, while this was undoubtedly the worst example of the rider acting recklessly with no regard for the possible consequences, it was not, by any means, the first.

The first significant entry on Murphy’s disciplinary record was a three-month ban for a positive test for cocaine, which was reduced from the standard six months for a first offence when he told a disciplinary hearing that it was a result of “environmental contamination” after sexual contact with a user of the drug.

He was then banned for 14 months from December 2021 after admitting a variety of charges which included serious breaches of Covid-19 protocols, misleading British Horseracing Authority officials and two failed breath tests for alcohol before racing.

“We conclude you thought you were above the rules and the law,” James O’Mahony, the chair of the panel that found Murphy in breach, told him as he imposed the suspension. “All you had to do was self-isolate as countless others had to do, but you embarked on a deception that was planned, carefully calculated and detailed and it was prolonged for a significant period of time.”

When Murphy returned to action in February 2023, the BHA imposed undisclosed additional conditions on his licence. In the light of this, along with additional details that emerged at Thursday’s hearing, it seems even more astonishing than it did at the time that Murphy was able to resume riding within 48 hours of the crash.

A jockey who is stood down after a fall needs to pass the doctor before riding the next day. After a concussion, they are stood down for a minimum of seven days, because a rider whose physical or mental abilities are impaired is a danger both to themselves and the horses and riders around them.

The BHA was aware that Murphy had missed four rides at Southwell a few hours after the crash, as the local stewards reported that he had had “traffic issues” beforehand. The regulator was also aware of widespread rumours that Murphy had been involved in a car crash but was seemingly either unable or unwilling to stand him down from riding until his fitness to do so had been confirmed.

The BHA has a duty of care to all licensed jockeys. Had Murphy been involved in a race-riding incident that resulted in an injury to himself or a fellow rider, the potential consequences are unthinkable and if the “A” in BHA is to mean anything at all, it needs to find a way to avoid a similar situation in the future.

Oisin Murphy is a generational talent among jockeys, a multiple champion whose instinctive ability to get the best out of any horse he rides was apparent from his earliest days in the saddle. Out of the saddle, he has clearly also struggled to cope with the demands and pressures of riding at the top level, not least from such an early age, and deserves to be supported as he addresses his issues.

But as he prepares for an imminent engagement with the BHA over possible additional conditions on his licence, Murphy should probably reflect on judge Goozee’s words above all. He is, indeed, a very lucky man – lucky to have been blessed with an astonishing talent, lucky to have been able to exploit it to the full and very lucky to have walked away from April’s crash with no serious injuries, or worse.

But if he keeps pushing his luck, then sooner or later, it will run out. It is now up to the BHA to ensure that, having allowed Murphy to ride within two days of the crash and then for two months with a near-inevitable court case looming, it does not lose control of the narrative again.

Ombudsman to eclipse rivals

The older horses have had a tough time of it against the three-year-olds in the Eclipse Stakes over the last decade, but two high-class four-year-olds – Ombudsman (3.35) and Sosie – have an obvious chance to redress the balance a little in the latest renewal of the first Group One clash of the generations at Sandown on Saturday.

Ghaiyyath was the last Eclipse winner aged four or above in the Covid summer of 2020, with three-year-olds winning all four runnings since and seven of the last 10 in all. Three of the last four, meanwhile, were trained by Aidan O’Brien, and all three – City Of Troy, Paddington and St Mark’s Basilica – arrived at Sandown with a Classic success to their name.

Camille Pisarro, the Prix du Jockey Club (French Derby) winner, is the O’Brien runner that fits the profile on Saturday, but he benefited from an outstanding ride from an ideal draw at Chantilly and it is hard to overlook the fact that Ryan Moore, O’Brien’s stable jockey, is aboard Delacroix, the well-beaten favourite in the Derby at Epsom.

Delacroix was hampered in the early stages at Epsom and shuffled back through the field, so will be expected to improve significantly on that performance a smaller field on Saturday. Even the pick of his form, though, gives him plenty to find with John & Thady Gosden’s highly progressive Ombudsman (3.35) .

Ombudsman was twice blocked in his run in the Prince of Wales’s Stakes at Royal Ascot last time but then showed a turn of foot reminiscent of the great dual Eclipse winner, Mtoto, to put the race to bed once William Buick found running room.

Seventeen days is a swift turnaround from a Group One win but the Ascot form, with the Champion Stakes winner, Anmaat, in second, looks rock-solid. Sosie, André Fabre’s first Eclipse runner for 20 years, is a fascinating contender along with Ruling Court, the 2,000 Guineas winner, but Ombudsman arrives with the strongest recent form and, with just six runs in the book, as much if not more scope for improvement as any of his rivals.

Sandown 1.50 Kerdos finished first from a small group that raced on the unfavoured far side in the King Charles III Stakes at Royal Ascot last month and fifth overall, and looks sure to appreciate this drop in grade.

Haydock 2.05 A host of progressive three-year-old handicappers to pick from but William Haggas’s Valiancy could be the biggest improver making his handicap debut off 80.

Sandown 2.25 Michael Bell’s Greek Order was an eye-catcher from a difficult draw in the Royal Hunt Cup and remains well-handicapped on his form for Roger & Harry Charlton in 2023.

Haydock 2.40 Estrange will be a short price to follow up a convincing win over track and trip last time but with no obvious pace in a four-runner field, there are more appealing bets elsewhere.

Sandown 3.00 The fast-improving Blue Bolt should take this step up to Listed company in her stride.

Haydock 3.15 City Of Light remains feasibly-handicapped despite six wins in his last eight starts and the step up to 12 furlongs might eke out a little more improvement.