Site: The Guardian
Title: Red Sea cargo ships face new attacks as Houthis claim to have sunk vessel
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/08/red-sea-cargo-ships-yemen-houthi-attacks-bulk-carrier-sinking

Two crew members of a Greek-managed vessel have been wounded and two are missing after a drone attack off Yemen on Monday, hours after Iran-aligned Houthi militants claimed an assault on another bulk carrier in the Red Sea, saying the ship had sunk.

Monday’s attack 50 nautical miles southwest of the port of Hodeidah was the second assault by the Houthis against merchant vessels in the vital shipping corridor since November 2024, said an official at the European Union’s Operation Aspides, assigned to help protect Red Sea shipping.

The Liberia-flagged, Greek-operated bulk carrier Eternity C with 22 members on board – 21 Filipinos and one Russian – was attacked with sea drones and skiffs, its manager, Cosmoship Management, told Reuters.

Two crew members were seriously wounded and two were missing, the company said, adding that three armed security guards were on board. The vessel’s bridge was hit and telecommunications were affected.

The ship was adrift, an Aspides official said later, after an attack by sea drones and four speedboats with individuals who launched at least four rocket-propelled grenades. The ship had not requested escort or protection from the naval force, the official added.

There was no claim of responsibility for the attack.

Earlier, the Houthis claimed responsibility for Sunday’s attack on the Greek-operated MV Magic Seas bulk carrier off southwest Yemen. The raid involved gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades from eight skiffs as well as missiles and four uncrewed surface vessels.

The 19 crew members were forced to abandon the Liberian-flagged vessel as it was taking on water. They were picked up by a passing ship and have arrived safely in Djibouti, sources said.

The Houthis said they sunk the vessel, but Michael Bodouroglou, a representative of Stem Shipping, one of the ship’s commercial managers, said there was no independent verification that this had occurred.

The crew had reported fires at the vessel’s forepeak, in the bow. The engine room and at least two holds were flooded, and there was no electricity.

Aspides had earlier warned of a risk of explosion in the ship’s vicinity.

Since Israel’s war in Gaza against the Palestinian militant group Hamas began in October 2023, the Houthis have been attacking Israel and vessels in the Red Sea in what they say are acts of solidarity with the Palestinians.

Israel has struck Houthi targets in response, launching strikes on Monday for the first time in nearly a month. A US-Houthi ceasefire deal in May did not include Israel. The latest attacks highlight a growing operational risk to commercial operators whose vessels have called at Israeli ports, Maritime security firm Diaplous said.

Magic Seas was carrying iron and fertilisers from China to Turkey, a voyage that appeared low-risk as it had nothing to do with Israel, Bodouroglou said, adding that Stem Shipping had received no warning of the attack.

But the fleet of Allseas Marine, Magic Seas’ other commercial manager, had made calls to Israeli ports over the past year, according to analysis by UK-based maritime risk management company Vanguard Tech.

“These factors put the Magic Seas at an extreme risk of being targeted,” said Ellie Shafik, head of intelligence with Vanguard Tech.

John Xylas, chair of the dry bulk shipping association Intercargo, said the crew were “innocent people, simply doing their jobs, keeping global trade moving“.

“No one at sea should ever face such violence,” he said.