Site: The Guardian
Title: Reform councillor’s boast about removing ‘trans-ideological’ books from children’s library sections falls flat
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2025/jul/04/reform-councillors-boast-about-removing-trans-ideological-books-from-childrens-library-sections-falls-flat

A boast by a Reform UK councillor that he ensured the removal of “trans-ideological material and books” from the children’s section of his county’s libraries has fallen flat after it emerged that no such material ever existed there.

Paul Webb, the cabinet member for communities at Kent council, whose portfolio covers libraries, posted a video to X in which he said he had been “recently contacted by a concerned member of the public who found trans-ideological material and books in the children’s section of one of our libraries”.

He said: “I’ve looked into this and this was the case. I’ve today issued instructions for them all to be removed from the children’s section of any of our libraries.

“They do not belong in the children’s section of our libraries. Our children do not need to be told they were born in the wrong body. So from today this will stop.”

Webb’s message was retweeted by Linden Kemkaran, the council leader, who in her own message , dotted with fire emojis, said: “Another victory for #commonsenseinKent my brilliant cabinet member Cllr Paul Webb has just got this trans material REMOVED from the children’s sections of all Kent’s libraries. Telling children they’re in the ‘wrong body’ is wrong and simply unacceptable.”

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/8899cabf0fa08300b6ed4ea7bdcf684f6444ad5d/0_0_1215_1990/master/1215.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Paul Webb, the cabinet member for communities at Kent council, said he had ‘issued instructions’ for the books to be removed from libraries.Photograph: X

Kemkaran’s tweet included a photo of a book called The Autistic Trans Guide to Life on what looked to be a library display shelf, next to a sign about Pride events.

Some local residents expressed doubt at the narrative, with the local news website the Kent Current noting that according to the county’s library system, all five copies of the book were kept in the adult nonfiction section , while the photograph appeared to be of a display at the entrance of Herne Bay library, not its children’s section.

When asked about this by the Guardian, Kent council said it could confirm that no books aimed at adults about transgender issues had been held in the children’s sections of Kent libraries.

It confirmed that the complaint was about a book on show near a library entrance which had since been “relocated to a section that is unlikely to be visited by children”.

In a statement the Reform-led council said: “Kent county council have confirmed that children are not and will not be exposed to adult transgender literature in our libraries.

“Staff at the county’s 99 libraries have been asked to ensure that books are always stocked in age-appropriate categories and that no adult literature makes its way into areas specifically aimed at children, or where children will be selecting books, such as the public welcome displays.

“It follows feedback from a resident who spotted a transgender book aimed at adults in a public display at the entrance of one library in Kent. The book has since been relocated to a section that is unlikely to be visited by children.”