Site: The Guardian
Title: ‘Something to be proud of’: Maresca delighted as Chelsea reach Club World Cup final
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/09/enzo-maresca-delighted-chelsea-reach-club-world-cup-final

Enzo Maresca did not hide his pride after Chelsea set up a final against either Real Madrid or Paris Saint‑Germain after defeating Fluminense with two brilliant goals from João Pedro.

Maresca’s team encountered few problems as they maintained their push for Club World Cup glory after producing an impressive performance to defeat the last non-European team left in the competition.

Chelsea took huge satisfaction from seeing João Pedro mark his full debut by scoring twice against his boyhood club. The forward joined from Brighton for £60m last week and was pivotal in his new team moving to within one win from being crowned club world champions.

“We are very happy, very proud to play the final on Sunday,” Maresca said.“The reason why is because this is the first edition of the Club World Cup. The best clubs in the world are here. For us to be in the final is something to be proud of.

“I know how difficult it is with all the games. Premier League top four, we won the Conference League and now a final here – it is fantastic.”

Maresca was delighted with João Pedro’s impressive display after coming in for the suspended Liam Delap. “I am very happy for João,” the head coach said. “He has quality to decide the game like today. We know he is a good player against teams that defend deep.”

There was concern for Chelsea after Moisés Caicedo limped off with a twisted ankle during the closing stages. The midfielder wanted to shake off the knock but had to admit defeat. “He felt he could try even though I told him we could play with 10 players,” Maresca said. “He tried and felt pain. So hopefully he can be fit for Sunday.”

Maresca said that Dário Essugo, a possible replacement for Caicedo, will miss the rest of the tournament after sustaining an injury in training. The Italian also looked ahead to facing either PSG or Madrid, who meet on Wednesday in the second semi-final.

“They are both top teams,” Maresca said. “One won the Champions League this season, the other one last season. They are top teams but we are proud to be there.”