Site: The Guardian
Title: Spain have looked unstoppable at Euros but there are ways to beat them
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/10/spain-have-looked-unstoppable-at-euros-but-there-are-ways-to-beat-them

O ne week of Euro 2025 has passed and already there is unquestionably a frontrunner. Spain with their glittering array of talent have already shown the levels that they can reach in their opening two matches.

Even though two-time Ballon d’Or winner Aitana Bonmatí is yet to return to the starting XI after suffering from a brief bout of viral meningitis, they have caught the eye with their goalscoring prowess and command of the ball. In among the goals and dominant play, however, are there some gaps in the armour that can be exploited?

There is no denying that Montse Tomé’s team are looking in frighteningly good form. Since missing out on Olympic Gold last summer, Spain have won 10 of their past 13 games and lost just once. In their opening matches of the Euros, they secured comprehensive victories against Portugal (5-0) and then Belgium (6-2) with an average of 75.5% ball possession.

There is so much to enjoy about the way La Roja play football. Their in-possession stats are eye-catching – across the first two games, they recorded 88.5% passing accuracy – as they try to suffocate their opponents. Their midfield ranks as the best in Europe with their patience in buildup and rotations that see them thrive in central areas.

Alexia Putellas has been a player on a mission after missing out on the last edition with an anterior cruciate ligament injury and is currently the tournament’s joint top scorer. After a strong season at Barcelona where she recorded 39 appearances, 22 goals and 17 assists across all competitions, she is now excelling on the European stage. She enjoys the almost telepathic communication she has with those around her. For her goal against Portugal, Mariona Caldentey launched a quarterback-style pass forward to pick out her run, a move the Arsenal player said they’ve done “about 80,000 times” before.

The structure of their midfield, supported by the under-credited deeper-lying Patri Guijarro, allows for Putellas and whomever she is partnered with to push up. When Bonmatí is involved, the rapport between all three is second nature but the fascinating thing at this Euros is that they have looked just as in sync with Vicky López starting. The 18-year-old has taken to international football like a duck to water. She marked her senior major tournament debut with a fantastic goal, a visionary run into the box and an instinctive finish that her older peers have done many times before.

Another aspect not to be overlooked is the variety of goals Spain have scored. Ten of their 11 goals in Switzerland have come from inside the box and they have added a variety of buildups. While they still favour moving through central areas, they have been utilising the long ball on more occasions. In Esther González, they have an in-form traditional striker, one that has not always fit the mould of the Spanish national team.

While there have been so much to praise in their opening performances, however, there are also signs that they can be undone. Belgium revealed their defensive frailties, particularly in Hannah Eurlings’ goal which showed how the opposition can expose their high line and the profile of centre-backs they possess. Irene Paredes is a renowned defender and leader but has issues when facing direct, pacy attackers in transition. Stina Blackstenius, Mayra Ramírez, Alessia Russo and Tessa Wullaert are some of strikers on a domestic and international stage to have recently got the better of the 34-year-old.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/641eb80325713a363283a1a37d1d3f627e659486/0_0_4050_2736/master/4050.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Irene Paredes and Hannah Eurlings battle for the ball during Spain’s victory over Belgium.Photograph: Priscila Bütler/SPP/Shutterstock

Belgium and Portugal did not have strong enough defensive or midfield units to withstand the pressure Spain put their opponents under, nor did they seem particularly willing to sacrifice their style. That is naive; if you try to match Tomé’s side in possession, you will undoubtedly lose. It is telling, however, that the one defeat they’ve suffered this year was from an England team who were prepared to adjust. They packed out the central areas, forced Spain wide, stretched them in transition with direct forwards and held them, for the most part, to shots from distance. Back to that previous stat – just one of their goals this tournament has been from outside the box. Arsenal did precisely the same to Barcelona in winning the Champions League final .

There is no doubting the challenge that awaits any side taking on this Spanish team. Their philosophy appears to be that it doesn’t matter about defending if they can outscore their opponent. However, they have yet to face a truly elite opposition and only then can we really understand what the story of their tournament will be.

Get in touch

If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email moving.goalposts@theguardian.com .

This is an extract from our free weekly email, Moving the Goalposts. To get the full edition, visit this page and follow the instructions . Moving the Goalposts is delivered to your inboxes every Tuesday and Thursday .