Site: The Guardian
Title: Speed restrictions imposed on two main train lines amid UK heatwave
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jun/30/speed-restrictions-train-lines-uk-heatwave

The heatwave has started to have an impact on rail services in parts of southern Britain, with speed restrictions imposed on two main lines out of London due to soaring temperatures on the tracks.

Passengers have been urged to check before travelling and warned to expect longer journeys and possible cancellations on routes west from London Paddington and south of the capital on the Brighton mainline.

Restrictions were put in place at the weekend for the Brighton mainline through Monday and Tuesday, affecting Southern, Thameslink and Gatwick Express services.

Network Rail and train operators decided at midday on Monday to extend the speed restrictions to the western mainline, affecting primarily Great Western trains running to the south-west and south Wales.

According to Network Rail, the temperatures exceeding 30C translate into 50C heat on the track, increasing the risk of failure.

The speed restrictions imposed west of Paddington through the Thames valley area are likely to mean a 10- to 15-minute delay on most trains, according to a GWR spokesperson.

The compounding delays are likely to mean disruption and cancellations as the day goes on. Straggling Glastonbury returnees could be caught in the delays. GWR said it had already picked up more than 6,000 festivalgoers from Castle Cary station on Monday morning.

Restrictions are in place until 10pm on Monday. With temperatures on Tuesday expected to nudge higher, railway managers are likely to confirm speed restrictions for a further day.

The heat has yet to reach the extremes of three years ago , when services across England and Wales were disrupted and under speed restrictions amid fears that rails would buckle.

A spokesperson for Network Rail and the train operators said: “With temperatures set to soar as forecast by the Met Office, speed restrictions have to be imposed across large parts of the network to ensure everyone’s safety.

“We’re sorry but this means we won’t be able to run as many trains as normal and journeys will take longer. Trains that are running will also be much busier. If you are able to work from home then that may be your best option.

“If you do take the train then please remember to take a bottle of water, and if you begin to feel unwell, seek help at the next station and speak to station staff. Pulling emergency alarms onboard may delay us getting help to you.”

While passengers in northern England and Scotland have escaped the heat, those hoping to take the west coast mainline north of Carlisle to and from Glasgow have been unable to travel after a tree fell and blocked the line.