Site: The Guardian
Title: Starmer, Cooper and King Charles mark 20th anniversary of 7/7 attacks
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jul/07/keir-starmer-king-charles-yvette-cooper-20th-anniversary-july-7-attacks

Keir Starmer, King Charles and the home secretary, Yvette Cooper , have marked the 20th anniversary of the 7 July attacks in London in which Islamist suicide bombers killed 52 people and injured more than 770.

The prime minister said: “Today the whole country will unite to remember the lives lost in the 7/7 attacks, and all those whose lives were changed for ever. We honour the courage shown that day – the bravery of the emergency services, the strength of survivors and the unity of Londoners in the face of terror.

“Those who tried to divide us failed. We stood together then and we stand together now – against hate and for the values that define us of freedom, democracy and the rule of law.”

The king said people should remember those who were killed in attacks on three London Underground trains and a bus, but also the stories of courage and compassion that day.

“Today, as we mark 20 years since the tragic events of 7th July 2005, my heartfelt thoughts and special prayers remain with all those whose lives were for ever changed on that terrible summer’s day,” he said.

“We remember with profound sadness the 52 innocent people who were killed in senseless acts of evil – and the enduring grief of their loved ones. We recall, too, the hundreds more who carry physical and psychological scars, and pray that their suffering may ease as the years pass.

“In doing so, we should also remember the countless stories of extraordinary courage and compassion that emerged from the darkness of that day. The selfless bravery of our emergency services, transport workers and fellow citizens who rushed towards danger to help strangers reminds us of the very best of humanity in the face of the very worst.”

Cooper said: “Twenty years have passed since 7/7 but the passage of time makes what happened that day no less shocking. It was an appalling attack on our capital city and on democracy itself.

“As we come together to mark this anniversary, my thoughts remain with the victims, survivors and all who loved them. Amid the horror of that day, we saw the best of people, our emergency services, first responders and ordinary Londoners who bravely acted to help one another. Their courage continues to inspire us.”

Two weeks after the attacks, five other would-be suicide bombers tried to detonate similar devices on tube carriages and a bus, but one terrorist dumped his device and the four other bombs failed to properly detonate, causing no injuries.