Site: The Guardian
Title: ‘Such a kind kid’: former neighbours and all Portugal grieve for Diogo Jota
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/04/diogo-jota-portugal-grieves-gondomar-neighbours

A na Oliveira can barely get through a sentence before breaking down in tears. She has lived most of her life across the street from Diogo Jota’s family home in Gondomar, a small city on the outskirts of Porto in northern Portugal. The sorrow that has engulfed the nation since the Liverpool forward’s death is felt particularly acutely there.

Ana can still picture Diogo clearly as a boy, dropping his backpack after school and spending hours kicking a ball against the wall of his house. His younger brother, André Silva – who perished in the same car crash in northern Spain on Thursday – quickly followed in his footsteps, sharing his love for the game. The brothers would often invite Ana’s brother, Ângelo, for a quick match in the street before dinner.

“The family came from very humble beginnings,” Ana says, her voice trembling. “Diogo was always such a kind kid – the ball never left his feet. But even with all that passion for football, he was an excellent student. His mother always reminded him to stay focused in school, and he took it seriously. He knew that not everyone makes it in football.”

News of Jota’s death sent shock waves through Gondomar, where the brothers were raised. But the grief spread far beyond the city limits. Jota was a core member in the Portuguese team, earning 49 caps and scoring 14 goals. Known for his quick wit, grounded personality and love for family, he became a fan favourite. Those who knew him speak of his humility and generous heart.

In the early hours of Thursday, Ana began receiving messages from friends and colleagues – people who knew of her close ties to the Jota family – asking if the heartbreaking rumours were true.

“A lot of people messaged me asking if it was fake news,” she says. “It wasn’t. We knew by sunrise. It’s an unimaginable tragedy. Just days ago, he got married in a beautiful ceremony. He has three children: one is five, the other three and the baby is only nine months old. One moment you have everything and in the blink of an eye it’s all gone. As a mother myself, I still don’t have the courage to write to his mum. I just don’t have the words.”

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/f22ef7ab223f2a516c0014cb05064e019aeaa85b/0_0_3658_2058/3658.jpg?width=465&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Diogo Jota, Liverpool and Portugal footballer, dies aged 28 – video

Thursday was meant to be a historic day for Portuguese media. For the first time since the country’s return to democracy, a former prime minister was facing trial on corruption charges. Every major outlet was covering the landmark event, which was expected to be the story of the week, if not the year. Dozens of reporters were stationed outside the courthouse in Lisbon. But that story all but disappeared when the death of Diogo Jota was confirmed. Politicians, football clubs and public figures rushed to express their sorrow.

“More than dismay, it’s a shock,” said president Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa in an impromptu press conference outside his official residence. “It’s a shock because a 28-year-old man dies, and his brother André dies with him. He was living a very happy moment in his family life, and he was progressing as an exceptional footballer, both internationally and with the national team. He had his whole future ahead of him. We expect the elderly to leave us – not the young.”

The president recalled the last time he embraced the Liverpool player: a hug shared after Portugal’s win over Spain in the Nations League final. “None of us imagined it would be the last hug. Him, myself, all of us – we thought it would be just one of many more to come, for all the success we believed he still had ahead of him.”

In the quiet village where Diogo’s grandparents lived, 82-year-old Cosme Silva is struggling to find the right words. A former football coach, Cosme once managed Diogo’s father in a local team. He says the father’s discipline and humility were passed down to both sons.

“They’re such good people. Always generous, always willing to help. It’s like I always say: the good ones go, and the rest stay. Diogo was a great student, from a family of footballers. His uncle Jorge was also talented – though with a bit of a temper.” He ends his sentence with a chuckle.

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/e48b99b07edc926450241d1d23d441182355fa48/342_197_4019_2710/master/4019.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Diogo Jota with the Nations League trophy won with Portugal last month in his final match.Photograph: Maja Hitij/Uefa/Getty Images

The success and money that came with Jota’s move to England never changed him, Cosme says: “He stayed grounded. The fame never went to his head.”

Ana Oliveira agrees. “He was always trying to help. He sent boots to my brother. If you needed something, it might take some time but he always came through.”

On Saturday morning Diogo and André will be buried in Gondomar. Family and friends will be present but really all of Portugal will be there, united in grief, to give one final goodbye.