Site: The Guardian
Title: Taking flight: how Premier League clubs are racking up 175,000 summer air miles
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/12/taking-flight-how-premier-league-clubs-are-racking-up-175000-summer-air-miles

Arsenal

After a training camp in Spain the Gunners head to Asia, kicking off their tour with a friendly against Milan in Singapore. They play again at the National Stadium four days later, against Newcastle, then face Spurs in Hong Kong. Two friendlies follow at the Emirates Stadium, against Villarreal and Athletic Club.

Aston Villa

Unai Emery’s side begin pre-season at Walsall and play again at the EFL club’s stadium, against Roma, three weeks later after stops in Germany and the US. A game at Hansa Rostock is followed by Villa facing Eintracht Frankfurt in Kentucky, St Louis in Missouri and Nashville in Tennessee before returning home. They finish by playing at Marseille and Villarreal in a final weekend of action.

Bournemouth

After behind-closed-doors friendlies at home to Hibs and Bristol City, the club travel to the US. Premier League Summer Series fixtures against Everton, Manchester United and West Ham take place in New Jersey, Chicago and Atlanta respectively. The club finish preparations at home to Real Sociedad.

Brentford

Three friendlies have been announced – two London. After a game at QPR, Brentford host Borussia Mönchengladbach. But first they travel to Portugal for a training camp which will include a game against Gil Vicente just north of Porto.

Brighton

Two games in England in front of fans – at Southampton and at home to Wolfsburg – will be augmented by at least one match behind closed doors and a training camp in southern Spain.

Burnley

After a week’s training in Portugal the club play four friendlies in England. Games at Huddersfield, Shrewsbury and Stoke are followed by a home match against Lazio.

Chelsea

Chelsea started their Club World Cup adventure based in Philadelphia, playing two group games there and one in Atlanta. After relocating to Miami for their last-16 tie in Charlotte, they returned to Philadelphia for a quarter-final there before heading to New York for the semi-final and final. After returning they have two friendlies at home, against Bayer Leverkusen and Milan.

Crystal Palace

A training camp in Austria includes games against Mainz and Augsburg. Before that come a friendly behind closed doors against Millwall and a match at Crawley. Preparations finish with the Community Shield against Liverpool .

Everton

After a training camp in Scotland and two games in Lancashire, against Accrington and Blackburn, Everton head to the US to play in New Jersey (Bournemouth), Chicago (West Ham) and Atlanta (Manchester United). On 9 August comes the first full-capacity game at their new Hill Dickinson Stadium home, with Roma the opponents.

Fulham

A training camp in the Algarve is expected to feature two matches in front of fans in the Faro area, and one of those has been announced – against Nottingham Forest . Eintracht Frankfurt then provide the opposition at Craven Cottage in the only other confirmed friendly.

Leeds

Matches during a training camp in Germany cannot be watched by fans after a ruling by police and local authorities. Supporters can see the team face Manchester United in Stockholm, Villarreal at Elland Road and Milan in Dublin.

Liverpool

After a game at Preston the champions face Milan in Hong Kong then play at Yokohama F Marinos on a first pre-season trip to Japan. Five days later they host Athletic Club in an unusual double header, the games kicking off at 5pm and 8pm. The Community Shield concludes their pre-season.

Manchester City

At the Club World Cup they travelled from their Boca Raton training base in Florida to games in Philadelphia, Atlanta and Orlando. After missing out on that prize they face Palermo in Sicily to contest the inaugural Anglo Palermitan Trophy.

Manchester United

After post-season matches in Malaysia and Hong Kong, the club start pre-season preparations against Leeds in Stockholm. They then play three games in the US – against West Ham in New Jersey, Bournemouth in Chicago and Everton in Atlanta –before ending with a home game against Fiorentina.

Newcastle

A training camp in Austria and a relatively short trip to Glasgow to face Celtic are followed by three games in east Asia. After taking on Arsenal in Singapore, the club play in South Korea for the first time, against a K-League Select XI in Suwon, and stay in the country for a game against Spurs in nearby Seoul. Then come home games against Espanyol and Atlético Madrid.

Nottingham Forest

After two games at Chesterfield, against the League Two club and Monaco, Forest head to the Algarve to face Fulham and Estoril. They go local again after that, playing at Birmingham City before hosting Fiorentina and the Saudi Arabian club Al-Qadsiah.

Sunderland

After local matches at Gateshead and South Shields the players head to the Algarve to face Sevilla and Sporting. Another trip aboard, to face Augsburg, follows but not before matches at Hearts, Hull and at home to Real Betis. The day after the match in Germany, preparations wrap up with a home game against Rayo Vallecano.

Tottenham

After games at Reading and Luton come four matches in four countries in a fortnight. Arsenal in Hong Kong and Newcastle in Seoul are followed by a visit to Bayern Munich to face Harry Kane. Then comes the Uefa Super Cup fixture against Paris Saint-Germain in the north-eastern Italian city of Udine.

West Ham

Another club participating in the US Summer Series, with games in New Jersey (Manchester United), Chicago (Everton) and Atlanta (Bournemouth). Before that a pre-season training camp in Germany’s Black Forest will include a game across the Swiss border against Grasshopper. Preparations conclude with Lille’s visit to the London Stadium.

Wolves

A trip to Portugal for games behind closed doors is followed by a match at Stoke and a fixture against Lens at Walsall. Then the team head to Spain for a short camp that includes a friendly against Girona before they finish at home to Celta Vigo.