Site: The Guardian
Title: Teenager given life sentence for fatally stabbing Jahziah Coke, 13
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jul/04/teenager-life-sentence-fatally-stabbing-jahziah-coke

A teenager who fatally stabbed 13-year-old Jahziah Coke during a dispute over cannabis has been given a life sentence with a minimum term of eight and a half years.

The youth, who cannot be named due to a court order protecting his identity, was convicted of murder by a majority verdict in April after a trial at Wolverhampton crown court.

Jurors heard how Jahziah died after suffering a six-inch deep knife wound to the chest at an address in Oldbury, West Midlands, in August last year.

Sentencing the teenager on Friday, Mrs Justice Tipples said she was sure the defendant had “intended to kill” Jahziah after pushing or moving a knife around the boy’s neck.

“When you killed Jahziah, he was only 13 and a child with everything in life ahead of him,” the judge said. “This was a nasty and violent attack.”

The boy, who denied deliberately inflicting the fatal injury, told the court during his trial that he was traumatised by the incident.

Although it was claimed in court by the defence that the knife used in the killing belonged to Jahziah and had been taken from him during the incident, the judge rejected the defendant’s claim that he was acting in self-defence.

She concluded that while there was no evidence of premeditation, his actions were “completely out of proportion” to any threat he may have faced.

After the stabbing, the defendant fled the scene over fences before taking a bus to a friend’s house, where he played video games for several hours, the court heard.

In a statement issued after the sentencing, Emily Clewer, a senior crown prosecutor at West Midlands Crown Prosecution Service, said: “This is a deeply tragic case where Jahziah Coke lost his life and entire future senselessly to knife violence.

“Jahziah Coke’s family and loved ones have suffered unimaginable pain and loss, and our thoughts are with them as they deal with the aftermath of this tragedy.

“The teenager responsible for this murder will now face the consequences of his actions in ways that will irrevocably change the trajectory of his life.

“While today’s sentencing cannot undo the awful events that transpired that day, we hope it sends a strong message about the devastating impact of knife crime and how it can destroy lives, families and futures.

“There are no excuses for carrying or using knives to harm and kill, and the CPS will continue to work tirelessly with the police and partners to tackle knife crime and bring offenders to justice.”