Site: The Guardian
Title: ‘The decision came as a shock’: Christian Horner’s tearful speech at Red Bull HQ
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/jul/10/christian-horner-red-bull-f1-sacking-farewell-speech

Christian Horner was reduced to tears when he announced to his Red Bull staff that his two-decade spell as team principal had been terminated.

The 51-year-old was removed from his role by the British-based Formula One team’s parent company, Red Bull GmbH, on Tuesday. Horner travelled to the team’s Milton Keynes campus on Wednesday to deliver the bombshell news to a stunned 1,500-strong workforce at 10am.

It is understood that Horner broke down in tears as he informed hundreds present inside the room, as well as many more on a remote video call, that he would be leaving with immediate effect. “Yesterday, I was informed by Red Bull that operationally, I will no longer be involved with the business for the team,” he told assembled staff.

In a clip of Horner’s speech obtained by Sky Sports News , he said: “The decision came as a shock to myself. I have had a chance to reflect over the last 12 hours and I wanted to stand in front of all of you to break this news, and just express my gratitude to each and every single member of the team that has given so much during the 20-and-a-half years that I have been here.

“When I arrived 20 years ago, with a few less grey hairs, I walked into a team and I didn’t know what to expect but I was immediately welcomed. We then started to build what became a powerhouse in Formula One . Watching and being part of this team has been the biggest privilege in my life.” An unplanned pause followed as Horner’s voice broke before a round of applause followed.

Horner later added on Instagram: “After an incredible journey of 20 years together, it is with a heavy heart that today I say goodbye to the team I have absolutely loved. It’s been an honour to be part of this incredible era of motorsport.

“Every one of you, the amazing people at the factory, have been the heart and soul of everything that we have achieved,” Horner’s statement continued. “Win and lose, every step of the way, we have stood by each other as one and I will never forget that.

It’s been a privilege being part of and leading this epic team and I am so proud of our collective accomplishments and you all,” he added. I leave with immense pride in what we’ve achieved and also with what’s in the pipeline for 2026 – and huge respect for everyone who’s made F1 the pinnacle it is today.”

Within minutes of his emotional address, Red Bull GmbH released the news to the world that Horner’s time, which began with the team’s inception in 2005, was up – and confirmed that Laurent Mekies, principal of partner team Racing Bulls, would be his replacement “as CEO of Red Bull Racing.”

The Red Bull Group CEO, Oliver Mintzlaff, released a separate statement thanking Horner for “his exceptional work over the last 20 years.” Horner drove away from Red Bull Racing’s headuqarters shortly before 11.30am yesterday.

Horner’s dramatic departure comes just over 17 months after he was embroiled in a scandal involving accusations of inappropriate behaviour by an employee, though he was later cleared by an investigation. He lost a number of key allies along the way, with design guru Adrian Newey, chief designer Rob Marshall and sporting director Jonathan Wheatley all departing.

Max Verstappen won a fourth consecutive world championship with Red Bull last year but he has been hesitant to confirm whether he will see out the remainder of his deal, which runs until 2028. His father, Jos, is a fierce critic of Horner’s and claimed in Bahrain last year that Red Bull would “explode” if Horner remained in his post.

The former Haas team principal, Gunther Steiner, believes Horner’s difficult relationship with Verstappen Jr played a role in his departure. “There was open criticism, it was not hearsay. Jos openly critiqued the management of Red Bull, mainly Christian, so we were all fully aware that relationship wasn’t good,” Steiner told TalkSport on Thursday.

“Max is the best driver at the moment and has got a big say in the team, so if he didn’t get on, or his father didn’t get on with Christian, for sure, that played a role in it,” Steiner added. “A driver like this grabs his power, because he knows his value … Max put himself in this position because he is the biggest asset they have at the moment.”

Horner had been the longest-serving team principals in F1 and will be remembered as one of its most decorated. Red Bull won their first world championship in 2010, with Sebastian Vettel taking four consecutive titles. Following a period of dominance by Mercedes, the Briton then oversaw Red Bull’s rise to the top again.

Red Bull won 21 of the 22 races held in 2023, with Verstappen setting a new record for 10 consecutive victories. The Dutchman has won only four of the last 26 races staged, and is 69 points behind championship leader, McLaren’s Oscar Piastri, at the halfway stage, with Red Bull a distant fourth in the constructors’ standings.