Site: The Guardian
Title: Thomas Partey, former Arsenal footballer, charged with rape and sexual assault
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/04/thomas-partey-former-arsenal-footballer-charged-with-rape-and-sexual-assault

Former Arsenal footballer Thomas Partey has been charged with five counts of rape and one count of sexual assault, the Crown Prosecution Service said.

The allegations relate to three separate women who reported incidents between 2021 and 2022. Partey has been charged with two counts of rape of one woman, three counts of rape of a second woman, and one count of sexual assault of a third woman. He will appear at Westminster Magistrates Court on 5 August.

Jaswant Narwal, of the CPS, said: “The Crown Prosecution Service has today authorised the prosecution of Thomas Partey for multiple counts of rape - after carefully reviewing a comprehensive file of evidence. Our prosecutors have worked closely with officers in the Metropolitan Police who have carried out the investigation, to review the evidence and advise on the appropriate charges.

“We remind everyone that criminal proceedings are active, and the defendant has the right to a fair trial. We know there will be significant public interest in this announcement, but it is absolutely vital that there is no reporting, commentary or sharing of information online which could in any way prejudice these proceedings.”

Born in Krobo Odumase, Ghana, in June 1993, Partey signed for Atlético Madrid in 2012 and made his debut for the club three years later following loan spells at Mallorca and Leganés. He made 188 appearances for the Spanish club, helping them win the Europa League in 2018 and La Liga in 2021, before moving to Arsenal in October 2020 for £45m, his release clause, signing a four-year contract as Mikel Arteta went about constructing a squad capable of challenging for major honours.

Partey established himself as the defensive anchor of Arteta’s midfield, featuring 33 times as they finished second to Manchester City in the Premier League in 2023. The following season he featured only 14 times as Arsenal again finished runners-up to City due to a hamstring strain and, overall, his time at the club was beset by injury issues. However, he largely overcame that in his final campaign at the club, featuring 52 times in all competitions as Arsenal again finished second in the league, this time to Liverpool, and reached the semi-finals of both the Carabao Cup and Champions League.

Partey has 53 caps for Ghana, scoring 15 goals.