Site: The Guardian
Title: Tommy Robinson denies harassing two MailOnline journalists
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jul/03/tommy-robinson-denies-harassing-two-mailonline-journalists

The far-right activist known as Tommy Robinson has denied harassing two journalists by allegedly telling them: “I’m coming to get you” and “I’ll be knocking at your door”.

Robinson, 42, whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, appeared at Southwark crown court where he denied two offences of harassment causing fear of violence.

He entered not guilty pleas after details of the charges were read out in court before a scheduled five-day trial, starting on 16 October next year.

The charges relate to accusations that he used his X account over a number of days to harass two MailOnline journalists, Andrew Young and Jacob Dirnhuber, and family members.

Robinson is charged with harassment causing fear of violence by making a telephone call in August last year in which he is alleged to have told Young he would visit his home and said: “I’m coming to get you.”

The activist is also alleged to have used his X account a day later to post three edited photographs depicting Young’s wife, daughter, and his vehicle, with the message: “Hey JDirnhuber get your colleague Andrew Young to call me back, you see he published pictures of my family and gave away their location.

“I’m working on a news piece myself about all of you, I won’t identify any innocent people or give address as that’s not morally right unlike you scum. You will all be questioned on camera about how you think endangering children is ok. My homework continues.”

Robinson is also charged with harassment causing fear of violence by allegedly posting a direct message on X to Dirnhuber on 5 August at 8.50am in which he said: “I’ll be knocking at your door.”

He is also alleged to have posted direct messages on the same day to Dirnhuber, saying: “Let your bosses know I’m coming to all your houses,” “Okay got your address” and “We need to talk”.

On 6 August, Robinson is alleged to have posted on X: “Got ya Jdirnhuber this is Jacob, he likes to locate and endanger families. Jacob and the rest of the Daily Mail journalists who were involved in endangering my children have today been located.

“I look forward to hearing on camera your justification for doxxing my children’s location. I got all three of you tagged and bagged in one day.”

Robinson is also alleged to have posted on 6 August at 10.50pm a direct message on X to Dirnhuber in which he said: “I’ll bring my questions to all of your doors.”

A previous hearing at Westminster magistrates court heard that none of the alleged harassment contained direct threats of violence.