Site: The Guardian
Title: Transfer latest: Arteta hails £5m Arrizabalaga, West Ham push for Slavia defender Diouf
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/01/transfer-latest-arsenal-kepa-arrizabalaga-arteta-west-ham-el-hadji-malick-diouf-slavia-prague

Mikel Arteta has said Arsenal will benefit from Kepa Arrizabalaga’s experience and “real hunger to win” after the world’s most expensive goalkeeper completed a £5m transfer from Chelsea .

Arrizabalaga leaves Chelsea seven years after joining for £72m from Athletic Bilbao and will compete at Arsenal with his Spanish compatriot David Raya. After falling out of favour at Stamford Bridge Arrizabalaga has spent the past two seasons on loan, at Real Madrid and then Bournemouth.

“He is a player we know, having come up against him many times in recent seasons,” Arteta told Arsenal’s website . “He brings a wealth of experience, which his teammates will benefit from, and he has a real hunger to win. Kepa works hard and will elevate our levels. I know he will fit in perfectly.”

Arrizabalaga is Arsenal’s first summer signing and is expected to be followed by the Brentford captain, Christian Nørgaard , and Martín Zubimendi, another midfielder, who is due to join from Real Sociedad for £35m. Arteta also wants a centre-forward and another attacker, with Crystal Palace’s Eberechi Eze among the players under consideration.

West Ham face a battle to convince Slavia Prague to sell El Hadji Malick Diouf. The left-back is a target for Graham Potter and discussions have taken place over a deal.

Slavia are reluctant to lose the Senegal international, who is comfortable as a wing-back, and want about £20m. West Ham have repeatedly made clear they are under pressure to sell before they buy. Incomings without significant sales would leave them at risk of breaching the Premier League’s profitability and sustainability rules.

Potter wants a left-sided defender, with Emerson Palmieri likely to leave. Ollie Scarles enjoyed a breakthrough campaign last season but the 19-year-old is inexperienced and is not ready to be first choice.

West Ham are also interested in the Liverpool midfielder Tyler Morton, who starred for England Under-21s in their victorious European championship campaign.