Site: The Guardian
Title: Transfer latest: Arsenal open Madueke talks with Chelsea, Everton sign £27m striker Barry
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/09/arsenal-open-talks-chelsea-signing-noni-madueke

Arsenal have opened talks with Chelsea over signing Noni Madueke. Personal terms have been agreed with the winger, who is increasingly likely to move to the Emirates Stadium.

Chelsea have been revamping their attack and decided they were open to selling Madueke after winning the Conference League in May. The 23-year-old has had a bit-part role during his side’s run to the Club World Cup final and is likely to benefit from a change of scenery. Madueke made a late substitute appearance during the win over Fluminense in the semi-final.

Arsenal are looking to boost their options on the flanks and identified Madueke as a key target last month. Chelsea will use Anthony Elanga’s £55m move to Newcastle from Nottingham Forest as a guide for Madueke’s valuation. Arsenal are likely to push for a lower fee, with negotiations continuing.

The England international’s appeal lies in his speed and ability to play on both flanks. He could provide cover for Bukayo Saka on the right and give Arsenal a left-footed option on the opposite side. Madueke has scored 13 goals and provided seven assists in 67 Premier League appearances. The move is not expected to end Arsenal’s interest in Crystal Palace’s Eberechi Eze .

Enzo Maresca has spoken positively about Madueke but there is a feeling at Chelsea that the former PSV attacker has not progressed enough.

Madueke has predominantly played on the right for Chelsea but is likely to be behind Pedro Neto and Estêvão Willian next season, and Geovany Quenda is due to join in 2026. Chelsea have also boosted their wide options by signing Jamie Gittens from Borussia Dortmund. João Pedro and Liam Delap have also been bought and Christopher Nkunku could provide further depth if he stays. Tyrique George is likely to go on loan.

Bournemouth have submitted a £25m bid for Djordje Petrovic. The goalkeeper is poised to leave Chelsea and has also been targeted by Sunderland but the Cherries are favourites to sign the Serb.

Everton have confirmed the signing of Thierno Barry from Villarreal for a fee understood to be £27m. The 6ft 5in striker, part of the France squad at the recent European Under-21 Championship, scored 11 goals in La Liga last season. The 22-year-old is David Moyes’s second summer signing, after the £12.6m deal to sign Carlos Alcaraz permanently.

Barry, who joined Villarreal from Basel last summer, named Wayne Rooney and Romelu Lukaku as former Everton players he enjoyed watching and hoped to emulate. He is hoping to make an impression on Everton’s supporters. “I think the fans here are, like, crazy people ... I like this,” he told the club’s website . “I like to score for these people.”

The Belgian winger Chemsdine Talbi has become Sunderland ’s fifth summer signing, joining from Club Brugge. The 20-year-old, who has signed a five-year contract, is understood to have cost about £19.5m.