Site: The Guardian
Title: Trump praises English of the leader of Liberia – where English is the official language
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jul/09/trump-liberian-president-english

Donald Trump was basking in the praise of a group of African leaders on Wednesday, when the Liberian president took the microphone.

“Liberia is a longtime friend of the United States and we believe in your policy of making America great again,” President Joseph Boakai said in English at a White House meeting before advocating for US investment in his country. “We just want to thank you so much for this opportunity.”

Trump, clearly impressed, inquired where Boakai got his language skills.

“Such good English, such beautiful …” Trump said. “Where did you learn to speak so beautifully? Where were you educated?”

Boakai seemed to chuckle. English is the official language of Liberia.

“In Liberia?” Trump asked. “Yes sir,” Boakai said.

“That’s very interesting, that’s beautiful English” Trump said. “I have people at this table who can’t speak nearly as well.”

Liberia was founded in 1822 as a colony for free Black Americans, the brainchild of white Americans trying to address what they saw as a problem – the future for Black people in the US once slavery ended. English is Liberia’s official language, though multiple Indigenous languages are spoken there as well.

Trump hosted the leaders from Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mauritania and Senegal at the White House on Wednesday, telling them that he was shifting the US approach to the continent from aid to trade and that the US is a better partner for Africa than China. Many of the leaders at the meeting spoke in their own languages through interpreters.

Trump said his administration was committed to strengthening friendships in Africa, which he hoped to visit at some point.

“We’re shifting from aid to trade,” he said at the start of a White House meeting. “There’s great economic potential in Africa, like few other places. In many ways, in the long run, this will be far more effective and sustainable and beneficial than anything else that we can be doing together.”

The African leaders, in turn, heaped praise on the US president for brokering peace deals around the world and expressed support for his receiving a Nobel Prize.

“We are not poor countries. We are rich countries when it comes to raw materials. But we need partners to support us and help us develop those resources,” said Brice Clotaire Oligui Nguema, president of Gabon. “You are welcome to come and invest. Otherwise, other countries might come instead of you.”