Site: The Guardian
Title: Trump expected to resume weapons deliveries to Ukraine through Nato allies
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jul/11/trump-russia-ukraine-weapons

Donald Trump appears poised to deliver weapons to Ukraine by selling them first to Nato allies in a major policy shift for his administration amid frustrations with Vladimir Putin over stalling negotiations to end the war in Ukraine.

During an interview with NBC News, Trump said he will probably have a “major announcement” on Russia on Monday and confirmed he had struck a deal with Nato leaders to supply weapons to Ukraine .

Trump’s Ukraine envoy, Keith Kellogg, is scheduled to arrive in Kyiv on the same day for a week-long trip that comes after the US temporarily halted weapons shipments to Ukraine as part of a Pentagon review of dwindling stockpiles of crucial munitions including Patriot air defense missiles.

The White House has now sought to distance itself from the decision, and Trump has suggested he is ready to greenlight a major military aid package for Ukraine via Nato , reversing a previous policy of reducing support to the Ukrainian government to force Kyiv to sue for peace.

“I think I’ll have a major statement to make on Russia on Monday,” Trump said during the interview with NBC News, which aired on Thursday evening. “I’m disappointed in Russia, but we’ll see what happens over the next couple of weeks.”

During the interview, Trump laid out a plan by which the US could sell weapons to Nato and then they could be sent on to Ukraine. Trump has not previously approved packages of military aid to Ukraine.

“So what we’re doing is the weapons that are going out are going to Nato, and then Nato is going to be giving those weapons [to Ukraine], and Nato is paying for those weapons,” Trump said, probably indicating that they would be purchased by countries that are members of the Nato security bloc. Administration officials have said this would be different from the US supplying Ukraine directly, as Nato and not Washington would be making the decision to arm Kyiv.

Germany and other member states of the security bloc had spoken publicly about ongoing negotiations to purchase weapons from the United States to transfer to Ukraine.

Ukraine is producing more modern weaponry including drones, but still relies on the US to supply everything from Patriot missiles to defend from nightly Russian missile and drone attacks, Himars long-range missiles to strike behind Russian lines, 155mm artillery shells and other munitions.

The Axios news website said that some officials had said the US would only sell Ukraine “defensive” weapons, while others said the package could also include “offensive” weapons such as the Himars missiles.

Yet a key stumbling block remains US military production. The US only has about 25% of the Patriot missile interceptors it needs for all of the Pentagon’s military plans, the Guardian revealed this month, and fulfilling new orders can take years depending on the priority level given to the contract.

Kellogg is expected to address the US weapons shipments during his visit to Kyiv, the first since shortly after Trump’s inauguration.

During the interview, Trump also endorsed the Sanctioning Russia Act of 2025, a bill introduced by Senator Lindsey Graham, a Trump ally seen as a leader of Russia hawks in the legislature. Graham has said that the bill would impose “bone-breaking sanctions” on Putin and a 500% tariff on goods imported from countries that buy Russian oil and other goods, potentially targeting China and India.

Congressional insiders have told the Guardian that there is strong support for Ukraine in both the House of Representatives and the Senate but that they would require Trump’s political backing in order to pass the bill.

“They’re going to pass a very major and very biting sanctions bill, but it’s up to the president as to whether or not he wants to exercise it,” Trump said during the interview, his first explicit endorsement of the bill.

Experts have said that the bill would give Trump new methods to target Russia, but that he could also tighten enforcement or issue other sanctions unilaterally without waiting for authorization from Congress.

Trump has said in the past that he admires Putin but he increasingly has vented frustration over the lack of progress in peace talks and the continued airstrikes against Ukrainian cities.

On Wednesday night, Russia launched almost 400 Shahed drones and decoys, as well as ballistic and cruise missiles, in strikes against Kyiv that killed two and caused fires across the Ukrainian capital.

“We get a lot of bullshit thrown at us by Putin, if you want to know the truth,” Trump said during a cabinet meeting this week. “He’s very nice all the time, but it turns out to be meaningless.”