Site: The Guardian
Title: Two men found guilty in deaths of 53 migrants in Texas will spend rest of their lives in prison
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/28/migrant-deaths-texas-sentencing

Two men face spending the rest of their lives in prison after a federal judge sentenced them on Friday for their roles in the deaths of 53 people – including six children – who were found dead in an abandoned tractor-trailer in Texas in 2022.

A federal jury in Texas had found the two men, Felipe Orduna-Torres and Armando Gonzales-Garcia, guilty of various charges at the conclusion of a trial in March. Federal judge Orlando Garcia sentenced Torres to life in prison and Ortega to 83 years of incarceration, essentially a life sentence.

The judge also imposed a $250,000 fine on each of the defendants.

Five other men have also pleaded guilty for their role in the smuggling operation and are scheduled to be sentenced later.

The truck was holding 64 migrants from Mexico, Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador. The vehicle had a broken air conditioner and no water, which amounted to suffocating conditions in the Texas summer.

Only 11 of those who were in the tractor-truck survived an ordeal that grimly illustrated the risks migrants are willing to take to cross the US border in order to escape violence or financial turmoil in their countries.

The migrants had paid the smugglers between $12,000 to $15,000 each to be taken across the US border, according to the case’s indictment . They were placed in the vehicle in Laredo, a town at the border, and then headed to San Antonio, which is a three-hour drive away.

As temperatures rose inside the truck, the people inside screamed and banged on the walls. Many eventually passed out. When the truck was found on 27 June 2022, more than a dozen of them were taken to the hospital, where five more died.

The men had known the air conditioning in the truck was broken, according to prosecutors. And they had discovered dozens of the people inside had died when they opened the back of the truck at the end of the three-hour trip.

“Three years to the day after these two smugglers and their co-conspirators left dozens of men, women and children locked in a sweltering tractor-trailer to die in the Texas summer heat, they learned that they will spend the rest of their lives locked away in a federal prison,” said a statement from the US attorney for the western district of Texas, Justin Simmons.

Prosecutors said that Orduna-Torres was the leader of a group of men who smuggled people from Mexico and South America between December 2021 and June 2022. He and Gonzales-Garcia shared routes, vehicles, stash houses and transporters to “consolidate costs, minimize risks and maximize profit”, according to a statement from the justice department.

Migrant smuggling has become a multibillion-dollar industry that is often run in coordination with some of Mexico’s most violent cartels. While the number of migrants apprehended at the border has dropped since Donald Trump’s second presidency began in January, reports have said people are still being smuggled into the US through methods and routes that are even more dangerous.