Site: The Guardian
Title: Two more Ice deaths put US on track for one of deadliest years in immigration detention
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/30/us-ice-detention-deaths

The Trump administration is on track to oversee one of the deadliest years for immigrant detention as of late after the recent deaths of two men – one from Cuba and another from Canada – while in federal custody.

A 75-year-old Cuban man died last week while being held by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice), CBS News reported, citing a notification sent to Congress. This would mark the 13th death in its facilities during the 2025 fiscal year, which began in October.

At least two of those have been classified as suicides.

In comparison, Ice reported 12 deaths in the fiscal year 2024.

Advocates and immigration attorneys say deteriorating conditions inside an already strained detention system are contributing to the rise in deaths, which has unfolded as the administration aggressively ramps up efforts to deport millions of migrants.

Under the past three administrations, the worst year saw 12 deaths in Ice custody. If the current pace continues, the total for 2025 could double those numbers.

Critics say the system is collapsing under the pressure of Ice’s target of detaining about 3,000 people each day. As of mid-June, more than 56,000 migrants were being held – that is 140% of the agency’s stated capacity.

“These are the worst conditions I have seen in my 20-year career,” Paul Chavez, litigation and advocacy director at Americans for Immigrant Justice, told the New York Times . “Conditions were never great, but this is horrendous.”

Among the recent fatalities are 49-year-old Johnny Noviello, a Canadian who was found unresponsive on 23 June at a detention facility in Miami. Another is Jesus Molina-Veya, 45, who died on 7 June while in Ice custody in Atlanta.

Molina-Veya, from Mexico, was found unconscious with a ligature around his neck, according to officials. His death remains under investigation.

In response to Noviello’s death, the Canadian government has pressed US authorities for more information.

“The government of Canada was notified of the death of a Canadian citizen while in custody in the United States. Canadian consular officials are urgently seeking more information from US officials. I offer my sincere condolences to the family,” Anita Anand, Canada’s minister of foreign affairs, wrote on X .

Despite the high death toll, immigration enforcement remains a top funding priority for the Trump administration . Border and immigration enforcement have been making up two-thirds of federal law enforcement spending.

Under Trump’s proposed “ big, beautiful bill ”, the US would commit $350bn to national security, including for the president’s mass deportation agenda.