Site: The Guardian
Title: Two teens shot and six others bear-sprayed at New York City Pride march
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/30/nyc-pride-stonewall-shooting-teens

Two teenagers were shot and six other people were bear-sprayed at the tail end of New York City ’s Pride march on Sunday, bringing a violent end to the month-long LGBTQ+ celebrations .

New York police said the shooting occurred near the historic Stonewall Inn in Manhattan’s Greenwich Village, where the gay rights movement kicked off with an anti-police demonstration in June 1969.

Police said both victims – girls aged 16 and 17 – were shot shortly after 10pm and taken to New York’s Bellevue hospital. One of them is listed in critical condition from a gunshot to the head, police said. The other was shot in the leg and was reported to be in stable condition. No suspect has been identified, according to CBS News.

The shootings happened in Sheridan Square, which was teeming with revelers. Reports suggest that the daytime festivities were peaceful but, as night-time approached, the crowd of revelers grew rowdy and out-of-control.

“Saddened to learn about the shooting by the Stonewall Inn tonight as Pride celebrations were winding down,” New York City’s mayor, Eric Adams, posted on X late on Sunday night. “During a time when our city should be rejoicing and celebrating members of our diverse LGBTQ+ community, incidents like this are devastating.”

He added: “We’re praying for the speedy recovery of the victims in tonight’s shooting. [Police] will work quickly and tirelessly to bring the suspects to justice.”

Police have not offered a motive for the double shooting.

About two hours earlier, six people were injured in nearby Washington Square Park after being hit with bear spray, which is similar to pepper spray and is used to ward off angry bears.

The New York fire department said that the six who were injured were hit with the irritant at about 7.50pm and evaluated for minor injuries. Police later posted on social media saying: “An individual deployed bear deterrent. This individual is in custody.”

Details have not been released about the arrested person or what led up to bear spray attack, according to local reports. Police, meanwhile, asked the public “to remain calm”.