Site: The Guardian
Title: UK food delivery firms step up checks after claims of illegal workers
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/business/2025/jun/30/uk-food-delivery-companies-increase-checks-illegal-workers

The UK’s three largest food delivery companies have announced increased security checks for riders after ministers raised concerns about people working illegally for the firms.

Uber Eats, Deliveroo and Just Eat have committed to increasing the use of facial verification checks and fraud detection technology in efforts to ensure only those with registered accounts can work on their platforms.

The changes were announced after the firms met Home Office ministers on Monday to discuss people using the platforms to work illegally. Last week the shadow home secretary, Chris Philp, claimed to have found people working illegally for the firms during a visit to a hotel used to house asylum seekers.

The new checks will be rolled out in the next 90 days. Just Eat, which already uses facial recognition checks, will increase them from monthly to daily.

Angela Eagle, the minister for border security and asylum, said: “This government will not turn a blind eye to illegal working. It undercuts honest business, hits people’s wages and plays into the hands of the people-smuggling gangs.

“I welcome Deliveroo, Just Eat and Uber Eats’ pledge to increase facial verification checks following today’s round table. We will keep a close eye on their progress and continue discussions.”

Justin Madders, the employment rights minister, said: “Illegal working opens the door to mistreatment and exploitation, undercutting legal workers in the process by driving down wages and working conditions.

“We’re already delivering the biggest upgrade to people’s rights at work in a generation as part of our plan for change, and we will continue to engage with these companies to ensure these rights are enforced, building a fairer labour market.”

A Deliveroo spokesperson said: “We take a zero-tolerance approach to anyone abusing our platform, and today’s meeting with industry partners and the Home Office represents progress in our collective efforts to combat illegal working.

“The industry-leading measures Deliveroo put in place over the last year have had a positive impact, but criminals continue to seek new ways to abuse the system. Today we have committed to further strengthening our approach, increasing daily facial recognition checks, and we welcome the industry’s commitment to do the same.”

An Uber Eats spokesperson said: “We are committed to tackling illegal working and welcome continued collaboration with industry and the Home Office, which is essential in raising standards and ensuring consistency. We will continue to invest in industry-leading tools to detect illegal work and remove fraudulent accounts.”

A Just Eat spokesperson said: “Just Eat fully supports the government’s efforts to tackle illegal working and we are continuing to invest significant resources to protect the integrity of our network. Today, alongside the government and wider industry, we’re committing to further action to strengthen our systems and safeguards in response to these complex and evolving challenges.”