Site: The Guardian
Title: Viktor Gyökeres fails to report for Sporting training as he targets Arsenal move
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/12/viktor-gyokeres-fails-report-sporting-training-arsenal

Sporting are poised to take disciplinary action against Viktor Gyökeres after he missed his deadline to report for pre-season training. The striker, who wants a move to Arsenal, had been asked to join the rest of the squad by 5pm local time on Saturday.

Gyökeres’s absence was not entirely unexpected, the Sweden international having informed the Portuguese club of his intention not to return for the upcoming campaign. There is a faint hope at Sporting that a deal with Arsenal could be finalised this weekend.

Sporting are likely to fine Gyökeres unless he can present a legitimate justification for his absence, such as medical grounds, extended leave authorised by the board or an urgent family matter. The squad left for a training camp in the Algarve without him.

The Portuguese champions, for whom Gyökeres scored 54 times in 52 games last season, have no pressing need to sell. That is the primary reason why their president, Frederico Varandas, has taken such a firm stance in negotiations with Arsenal. He has said he wants €70m (£60.2m) plus €10m in add-ons after rejecting an approach from the London club worth €65m plus €15m.

Sporting are in a position of financial stability and sustained on-pitch success, unlike for much of the past two decades. They have won three of the past five Primeira Liga titles, after a 19-year drought, and benefit from the regular revenue stream of Champions League qualification.

With the budget for the coming season secured, the club are under no obligation to cash in on key assets. Gyökeres has been central to Sporting’s resurgence, scoring 97 goals in 102 appearances, and has three years on his contract.

Noni Madueke looks poised to finalise his £52m move from Chelsea to Arsenal after being granted permission to return to London from the Club World Cup as Enzo Maresca’s side prepare to face Paris Saint-Germain in Sunday’s final. The 23-year-old is expected to complete his medical in the coming days and will sign a five-year contract. Kepa Arrizabalaga left Chelsea for Arsenal at the start of the month.

Madueke will provide much-needed cover for Bukayo Saka on the right and is also capable of playing on the left, but it is understood Mikel Arteta still wants to add more creativity. Arsenal are expected to open negotiations with Crystal Palace over Eberechi Eze, although they are yet to make a formal offer. The England international, who has a £67.5m release clause, is thought to be open to the move.

Arsenal have also made progress in negotiations over a new contract for Ethan Nwaneri, who was part of the England Under 21 squad that were crowned European champions last month. He has attracted interest from Chelsea and clubs in Germany but is expected to join his fellow academy graduate Myles Lewis-Skelly in agreeing a deal to stay.