Site: The Guardian
Title: Watchdog to investigate police shooting of man with chainsaw in Kent
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jul/08/investigation-iopc-police-shooting-man-chainsaw-kent

An investigation has been launched after police in Kent shot a man wielding a chainsaw who was feared to have an explosive device, leaving him seriously injured.

The shooting happened at about 9pm on Monday close to the Park Gate Inn in Hollingbourne, near Maidstone.

The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), who attended the scene, said Kent police officers went to a house in Ashford Road at about 7.15pm to arrest a man on suspicion of assault.

The man refused to leave the house and armed officers were deployed. The watchdog said: “We have seen officers’ body-worn footage which shows the man, aged in his mid-30s, holding a chainsaw and another object in his hand, which, at the time, officers believed appeared to be a handmade firearm or IED (improvised explosive device). He was also wearing a gas mask and body armour.

“We can confirm a first baton round was fired by police and the man then took cover behind a hedge.

“Officers moved in and a police dog was deployed. The man ignored orders to put down the chainsaw, and a second baton round was discharged and then, seconds later, he moved towards officers and was shot by an officer with a conventional firearm.”

Officers found weapons at the scene, including a chainsaw and a device that was “made safe” by a bomb squad, the IOPC added.

Kent police said the incident was not terror-related.

The man had arm and abdomen injuries, which were thought to be potentially “life changing”, and remained in hospital.

Amanda Rowe, an IOPC director, said: “Police shootings are fortunately rare. However, given a man has been injured after being shot by police, our role is to independently investigate all of the circumstances surrounding this incident including the actions and decisions taken by the police.

“Based on analysis of evidence gathered to date, no police officer is under investigation for either misconduct or criminality – they are being treated as witnesses.

“We appreciate that the community will want answers quickly, and our investigators are working hard to establish the facts and piece together what occurred. Our thoughts are with everyone affected.”