Site: The Guardian
Title: Women’s Euro 2025: Guardian writers’ predictions for the tournament
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/jul/01/womens-euro-2025-guardian-writers-predictions-for-the-tournament

Which teams will reach the final and who will win?

It feels as if Spain and a revitalised Germany have the wind in their sails to meet in Basel, even if Aitana Bonmatí’s illness is a real worry for the world champions. Spain will win out on the night. England know the ropes and cannot be ruled out but their path to glory looks complicated. Nick Ames

I am going England-Spain, a rerun of the 2023 World Cup final. It would mean England finish second in Group D to go in the other half of the draw. Between those two, head says Spain; heart, of course, says England. Sophie Downey

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/496355b679a090cc3a70c59de38c6591f97d3081/0_0_2815_1929/master/2815.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Will England and Spain meet in the final of another major tournament?Photograph: Bagu Blanco/Shutterstock

Spain against Germany is the most logical final. Although England could disrupt that if they click, my instinct says Spain-Germany. Spain should get the job done and win their first Euros. They have never reached the final but have the strongest squad, in terms of technical skill, a relatively kind group draw and more days to rest and recover than their rivals in Groups C and D, so this should be Spain’s year. Tom Garry

I’ll go for Spain to win it, and it’ll be Germany, England or the Netherlands. Those are the four best teams in the tournament. Emma Hayes

Spain to beat Sweden in a disappointingly mid-paced final that feels like something of an anticlimax after their all-time classic against Germany in the semis. Jonathan Liew

France and Italy with France the winners. France are serial underachievers but they have been in hot form under Laurent Bonadei and, combining technical excellence with pace-suffused fluidity, are more dynamic than many rivals. They possess the weapons to win a first major tournament. Italy – much improved under Andrea Soncin’s management – look classic dark horses. Louise Taylor

Don’t make me do this. I have a terrible feeling England will finish second in the group and face Germany in the quarter-finals. That will be a tricky test but I’d back them to get past it and go all the way to the final, where they would meet Spain and lose to the world champions. Suzanne Wrack

Who will be top scorer?

Lea Schüller remains a formidable spearhead for Germany and, in a side who have carved recent opponents wide open, should add healthily to her tally in Switzerland. Alessia Russo could challenge her but may find England’s assignments too nip-and-tuck. NA

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/6037e74a379c72ce699e2c823844b3acfddaaf67/0_39_4846_2977/master/4846.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Lea Schüller will aim to add to her 52 international goals.Photograph: Stuart Franklin/Getty Images

Clàudia Pina – one of the most natural strikers in the competition. This is the 23-year-old’s time to shine on the back of a brilliant season for Barcelona, where she finished as the top goalscorer in the Champions League. SD

Pina could blow defences away. Even if she isn’t chosen to start every game, she could be even more lethal coming off the bench against tiring defences. A tally of five or six goals may be enough for the Golden Boot and I would back Pina to notch at least four during the group stage on the form she displayed towards the end of the club season. TG

I’m going to say Alessia Russo. I think Alessia is in a great place and I think since Renée Slegers has taken Arsenal on, she and Kelly Smith deserve huge credit for the development of Alessia. EH

Sandy Baltimore: bit left-field (pun intended), but hear me out. Played as a wing-back for much of her career but now adding goals to her game: five for France and a brace in the FA Cup final. France’s stacked frontline will allow her plenty of space to operate and she could easily go on a run. JL

Marie-Antoinette Katoto. The Lyon striker – she joins from PSG on Tuesday – has 38 goals in 55 appearances for France and combines precision finishing with often unplayable physicality. After rupturing an anterior cruciate ligament in the group stage of Euro 2022, then missing the 2023 World Cup, this could finally be the 26-year-old’s moment in the sun. LT

If you’re predicting Spain to win then it’s hard not to predict Pina to pick up the Golden Boot. She’s been in formidable form and although goals can come from a variety of Spain players, I think Pina will do very well. Were the Netherlands not drawn in such a tricky group I’d have fancied Vivianne Miedema. SW

Who will be the surprise team?

Iceland look strong, reliable and more than well placed to compete seriously in a winnable Group A. They have a habit of staying in games and, if they were to avoid Spain in the last eight, could travel far. It is also worth watching out for a hugely improved Italy. NA

Italy are my dark horses. Andrea Soncin has overseen something of a rebuild and refresh since he took over in 2023. They have been in steady form since, taking the scalps of Spain and Germany among others. Roma’s playmaker Manuela Giugliano is one to watch. SD

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/8bad54cd09ef84b334712f5e782d0abc8ada0187/0_0_3424_2560/master/3424.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Italy are fancied to go deep in the tournament.Photograph: Anders Wiklund/TT NEWS AGENCY/AFP/Getty Images

At least one of the seven teams in Group A and B who are not Spain will reach the semi-finals. That’s guaranteed, so while that won’t be a ‘surprise’, whoever makes it from that relatively low-ranking set will be a surprise name for a semi-finalist. There is little between the seven but I am leaning towards Italy, who have recorded some excellent results since the World Cup. TG

You have to talk about the French, while Italy are a good side and Belgium have the qualities to be disruptive. EH

Italy have claimed some big scalps in the past 12 months and if they escape a tough group the draw could easily open out for them. JL

Wales. The NWSL title in the United States is notoriously hard to win but the Wales coach, Rhian Wilkinson, pulled that feat off at Portland Thorns in 2022. Wilkinson has turned a highly motivated Wales into extremely awkward opponents and, with Jess Fishlock and Sophie Ingle in a high-calibre midfield, they look capable of reaching the quarter-finals of their first major tournament. LT

Is this Norway’s time to not be disappointing? The draw has certainly helped them and if they top the group that should give them momentum going into the knockouts. I don’t expect them to go far, but with Ada Hegerberg, Guro Reiten, Caroline Graham Hansen, Frida Maanum, etc the quality is there. SW

Who will be the breakthrough player?

Nobody with any handle on the England setup is blind to the prodigious talent of Aggie Beever-Jones. Now Europe should discover the Chelsea striker’s gifts first-hand. She has made a flying start at international level and should prove an explosive option from the bench. NA

Beever-Jones will bring the impact from the bench. The 21-year-old is playing in her first major tournament and has just enjoyed the season of her young career. If the Lionesses need a goal, they know they have someone in the ranks with an instinctive eye for one. SD

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/5c76d48c459b272f3cdd226e542a1a042cf1c8c0/0_0_3339_2101/master/3339.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: Aggie Beever-Jones could be the surprise package for the Lionesses.Photograph: Alex Livesey/Getty Images

For the viewer who may not be a women’s football diehard, this should be the tournament when Cláudia Pina breaks into the mainstream and receives wider recognition. Meanwhile, England’s Michelle Agyemang can go into this tournament with no fear and if she gets a chance off the bench she can show she is a future superstar. TG

Pina is someone who has got huge, huge potential. For England, we could talk about Grace Clinton for example, but I’m always going to say Beever-Jones, because if England need a different type of goalscorer in another moment in a game, I think she’s capable of delivering on that front. For Germany, watch out for Jule Brand; she’s a player who is so exciting to watch. EH

Vicky López. Still only 18 but long regarded as one of Europe’s most promising talents, López went to last summer’s Olympics but didn’t play. Has featured more often for Barcelona this season and this could be the tournament that puts her name in lights. JL

Manuela Giugliano. The Roma playmaker says she models her game on that of Andrea Pirlo but, at 27, is still to see her lofty domestic standing transposed on to the international stage. That could be about to change for a dead-ball wizard blessed with superior vision, a stellar passing range and a knack of making impeccable defensive interceptions. LT

Lauren James has had an injury-hit season for Chelsea but when fit she has looked sublime. The forward seems to have matured her all-round game, her defensive work rate as impressive as her attacking, and this could be the tournament where she really stamps her name on the international stage. In training she has looked phenomenal and her assist, after coming on against Jamaica for her first minutes in three months, showed her importance to England from a creativity point of view. SW

What are you most looking forward to?

Further evidence that standards at the game’s elite level continue to reach new heights – in a country that should be perfectly set up to host a smooth, joyful summer tournament. NA

I think the next month will be the best illustration of how far European football has continued to develop over the past three years. Any of five or six teams could win it and no side are infallible. In terms of the tournament, I am looking forward to seeing everything that Switzerland has to offer. This is a huge moment in their women’s football journey and I am sure they will seize it. SD

The three group matches between England, France and the Netherlands – all three of whom are capable of going all the way – should make for blockbuster viewing. The pressure riding on those early fixtures will be immense; they are akin to semi-finals, in terms of standard, but they are going to be entertaining us inside the first 11 days. I’m also looking forward to the mountainous scenery from the window seat of a Swiss train. It is a beautiful country. TG

Image: https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/02c92b0e0ace39c90e8b7b6ead6c2d2c0e0f5f82/0_0_6900_4600/master/6900.jpg?width=445&dpr=1&s=none&crop=none

Caption: The Dutch fans light up any tournament.Photograph: Hollandse Hoogte/Shutterstock

Nowadays players have got more access to the support they need to be the best versions of themselves, so the quality is going to be so much higher. There may be a bit of a shifting of the order, too; this may be a tournament where we talk about a Belgium or an Italy and not a Sweden and a Norway. That’s not to say that will happen, but there could be a shift. EH

The Dutch fans. Obviously. JL

You mean apart from the Swiss chocolate museum in Lucerne? Watching Wales and their 38-year-old, but still world-class, midfielder Jess Fishlock at their first major tournament. The final Group B game between Italy and Spain in Berne looks intriguing too. Off the pitch, seeing Lake Lucerne, the Alps and the Abbey Library in St Gallen, said to be one of the world’s oldest and most beautiful. LT

A cheese fondue. Does that need elaboration? It’s all I’ve been thinking about for months. On the pitch, Spain are obviously the favourites but the fact that any one of several teams (Spain, England, Germany, France, Sweden, the Netherlands) could win this tournament makes it hugely exciting. Set against the backdrop of stunning Switzerland, it will be memorable. SW